Thank you . Thank you so much . I am so happy to be back here and to be with all of you right here at the home of IBEW Local 357 .
And with so many longtime friends . Thank you , thank you , thank you .
Let me , in addition to thanking IBEW , let me thank all of the union members here .
The Nevada State AFL-CIO . Everyone who knows what it is to work hard and deserves a chance to get ahead and stay ahead .
Thank you . And particularly I want to thank Al Davis , manager and financial secretary of IBEW .
And I want to thank United Association of Plumbers and Pipefitters Local 525 who assisted with parking for this event too , so thanks .
Now you just heard from your longtime senator and someone who has lead the Senate in the majority and the minority with such tenacity , such focus , getting things done for the people of this state and America .
There 's a lot that I really love and admire about Harry Reid .
Let me just mention three of them . Number one : his wife Landra and the beautiful family that they have created together .
Number two : He always tells it as he sees it .
He 's not a man of many words , but when he uses them he 's very clear about what he 's trying to accomplish and why he thinks it will help people .
He 's been a champion of working people and every one of the interests that stands for the kind of America that Harry and I believe in .
We both feel very fortunate , and we want to make sure everybody has the same opportunities .
And number three : in the Senate he was a master of getting things done from the other side , whether they wanted to do it or not .
And I know how hard that was . I was in the Senate for eight years with Harry .
And before that I was First Lady and watching what he did as a senator and then of course I was Secretary of State .
He worked tirelessly everyday , but he also had a vision about what needed to happen .
I 'll just mention one thing that he mentioned . Harry Reid is one of the leaders in America for clean renewable energy .
At a time some years ago when a lot of folks didn't really know what that meant .
Harry was holding a conference every year , bringing people together to talk about how we can get more solar and wind and geothermal , how we create more jobs because of that .
And I will have more to say about it , but I think the progress that you 've made here in Nevada and the progress we 're making across America owes a great deal to the leadership of Senator Harry Reid .
I also want to thank Congresswoman Dina Titus , she has been a great voice for progress in the Congress , I can't wait to work with her .
And I am thrilled at the prospect . It 's up to you my friends , but I know you 're going to do the right thing to send Catherine Cortez-Masto to the United States Senate .
[ ] Okay , we 'll keep talking , and we 'll , and apparently these people are here to protest Trump , because Trump and his kids have killed a lot of animals , so thank you for making that point .
So let me keep going , because I want to say another word about Catherine .
She will be the first Latina ever elected to the United States Senate .
So here is what I hope I can do with Catherine and Dina , with Jacky and Ruben , with other members of the House and the Senate .
We are going to create more good jobs with rising incomes , we are going to have the biggest investment in new jobs that we 've had since World War II .
Now how are we going to do that ? Well number one , we are going to do exactly what Harry said .
We are going to have an investment in infrastructure , our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our ports , our airports .
But it 's not only what you can see , it 's also under the ground .
The water systems , the sewer systems , and yes , we need a new , modern , electric grid to be able to take and distribute all the clean renewable energy .
So I 'm excited about this because , as Harry just said , for every billion dollars we get 47,500 jobs , and they are mostly good union jobs with a good middle class income .
We are also going to do everything we can to assist unions and everything they represent to be able to organize and bargain collectively .
I am sick and tired of leaders in this country trying to bust unions like Donald Trump did here in Las Vegas .
I just came from an excellent business . A business , Mojave .
That 's right , Mojave Electric , right . That 's a company that understands they could do well by doing good .
It 's an IBEW union shop . It has a lot of apprentices .
It has benefits that are going to keep families together and keep them growing .
That 's what we need more of in America , and I 'm on the side of businesses and labor that work together .
The other thing I saw at Mojave is that we need more skills training for more Americans , and that includes apprenticeships programs .
Mojave working with the IBEW working with electrical contractors takes the time to actually train people , and I met some of those apprentices and those journeymen and women , and they are so proud of what they do .
And I want more people in America to have that kind of opportunity .
I 'll tell you something folks don't know . More than half of all jobs in 2020 , and that 's not long from now , will not require a four year education .
So here 's how I 'm fitting all the pieces together .
I want to make college affordable , in fact , I want to make it debt-free .
I want to help people who already have debts and the families that are burdened by those debts to be able to pay them back at a lower interest rate and have them forgiven after a certain period of time .
It makes no sense to me that Donald Trump can take bankruptcy six times , get out from under his debts , and we don't let families and students refinance their college debts .
But I think it 's really important that we do more like what I saw at Mojave today .
I want to give every business a $ 1,500 tax credit if they will train apprentices , and not for free , pay these apprentices while they 're getting trained so more people can take advantage of that opportunity .
We need more technical education back into our high schools .
I want us to train 50,000 high school teachers and junior high teachers in computer science so everyone single student in America has access to that kind of opportunity .
And we 're going to we 're going to , with our infrastructure program , finish the job of providing high-speed broadband Internet access to every single home and business in America .
I was talking to some teachers the other day , and I love teachers , I love teachers .
And I was talking to them , and they were telling me they had just done a national survey and they found that 70 percent of teachers assigned homework that required students to go use the Internet .
Now I think that 's good . We want our young people to learn how to use the Internet and understand the opportunities that they could have , but here 's the rub : 5 million students in America do not have access at home to the Internet .
So , the homework gets assigned and these 5 million kids , unless they 're close enough to a library they can get to , or somebody 's business , or somebody else 's home is connected somehow , they 're left out .
We do not have a single person to waste in the 21st century .
I want to unleash the talent and ambition of every young American .
So we 're going to give more high-school kids the chance to do real work , to get credit toward graduation .
We 're going to make community college free , so that high-school students and everybody else can get two-year degrees and credentials .
Because already today we have a big gap we have about a million jobs that are not being filled around America .
There are jobs for machinists , and tool and dye makers , and coders and lots of other skills .
We have a lot of unions that I 've been talking to over the past year and a half who are seeing their workforce get older .
Well , we can't afford that . We need to invest in our young people and give them different paths beside four-year college to get ahead in America .
That should be the basic bargain . Now In addition to jobs from infrastructure , advanced manufacturing , I 've seen a couple of examples of that over the last week in Ohio , Pennsylvania .
I saw a small business in Denver yesterday where they 're making homemade ties and scarves .
And I was real interested in that because Donald Trump said that he can't make his suits , or his ties , or his shirts , or his furniture in the United States .
Well , we just put a website , hillaryclinton.com/makeithere , and we 're telling him about 100 places where he can actually make all of those things right here in America .
And then then I have to tell you , he talks a lot about how he 's going to grow the economy .
Yet , he doesn't make things in America and just this past couple of weeks he asked for more visas to bring in foreign workers for his golf courses and his resorts .
And when asked , Why would you do that ? '
He said , Well , we can't find workers here . '
He really thinks he 's going to get away with this .
And then there 's the way that he 's treated small business .
I want to be a small business president . I want to help more small businesses get started , and grow , and create jobs here in Nevada and across America .
But I have now been hearing stories from so many people who did work for Donald Trump and one of his buildings , and then they wouldn't pay him .
I went to Atlantic City , and I met a number of small businesses , as well as workers , plumbers and painters , glass installers , marble installers .
At one of his resorts , they finished the work , the man who sold him the pianos and installed the pianos , they finished the work , and they submitted their bill .
And the Trump people said , No , we 're not going to pay you . '
Not because he couldn't , but because he wouldn't . And then he comes back and he says ,
Well , maybe I 'll give you 50 cents or 30 cents on the dollar . '
Now , I 've got to tell you , I take this really personally .
My father was a small businessman , and he printed fabric for drapes .
That 's what he did . He had a print plant .
It was a low-ceiling , dark place with two long tables and you 'd roll the fabric out on it , then you would take a silk screen and you 'd put it down , you 'd pour the paint in , you 'd take the squeegee , you 'd go from left to right , then you 'd lift it up and you would do it again , all the way down that table , the next table , until you finished doing it .
And then my dad would load the fabric up in his car and he would drive it to who ever had ordered it .
I can't image if he had shown up at some place that Trump owned and they said ,
Well , thanks a lot but we are not paying you . '
Actually , that happened here in Las Vegas . He refused to pay nearly $ 400,000 to a local Nevada drapery company which had to close its factory .
Four hundred thousand dollar order for a small business is huge .
And so I do , I take it personally . Small business is the backbone of our economy .
That 's where most of the jobs come from . We should be honoring people who take the risk and put in the hard work and the sweat to build their small businesses .
I also was disturbed when we learned some months ago that during the terrible housing crisis and no place was affected more than right here in Clark County , was it ?
Nobody . And I remember because in ' 08 I walked some of those streets and some of those neighborhoods and I met with people who were on the brink of or having been foreclosed .
And it was heartbreaking . And we still have work to do .
But what did Donald Trump say when all of this began to happen ?
Well he basically said , Hey this is good for me .
I can go buy . I can make money . '
Didn't matter the heartbreak . 5 million homes were lost .
$13 trillion in family wealth was lost , mostly homes .
And what was Donald Trump doing ? He was thinking about himself .
So you have got to ask yourself in this campaign , do you want a president who stands for
You 're fired ' or one who stands for You 're hired ? '
So the bottom line , which I think is becoming clearer everyday , is that Donald Trump is not qualified to be President , and he is temperamentally unfit to be Commander-in-Chief .
I said it Thursday night at the Democratic Convention , anyone you can provoke with a tweet should not be anywhere near nuclear weapons .
But I have to agree , as I usually do , with Harry .
We cannot take anything , anybody , or anyplace for granted .
We have work to do . And I need your help , I need you to be part of this campaign .
We are going to be registering voters , if you know that 's right , we have a young woman right there , if you 're not registered and you 're eligible as an American citizen , please go sign up .
And back there as well . We are trying , across the country , to register 3 million more voters and turn them out in November .
We are also going to do everything we can to reach out to our friends and our neighbors across this state and across America , answer their questions .
Somebody wants to be for Trump because they 're anxious , they 're fearful , maybe they 're angry because there 's a lot to be concerned about .
We need to talk . We need to talk because we don't want you being sold the same bill of goods that the students who signed up to go to Trump University were sold .
We don't want you to be left in the same position as the retirees in Florida were that put their money up for Trump condos , and there was never any built , and they didn't get their money back .
We don't want you to think any businessperson can get away with your doing the work and then not getting paid for it .
We don't want you to support somebody who doesn't support American workers and American businesses , and doesn't seem to understand we are stronger together in America .
Now , I will do everything I can in this campaign to tell you what I will try to do as your President .
And here 's why . You know , I 've been talking about my plans for jobs and education and healthcare and all the rest of the agenda for some months now .
And I admit , some people have made fun of that , they go
Oh my gosh , there she goes with another plan . '
But here 's what I believe . If I 'm asking you to vote for me , for president , then I want you to know what I 'm going to try to do as your president starting next January 20th .
And I want you to hold me accountable . I 'll be back here .
And I 'm going to be talking , I want to have a dialogue with the American people .
Not just during the election , but afterwards and for those four years because I think there are a lot of good ideas that Americans have .
That I want to hear about . And I 'll tell you something else , I want to be the president of all Americans .
Democrats , Republicans , Independents , young , old , everybody in between .
Because I think this election comes down to economic opportunity , national security , and American unity .
And I 'm going to work to make sure we pull together , we get the economy working for everybody , not just those at the top .
We keep our country safe , we work with our friends and allies , we don't insult them , we join together to get rid of the threats that we face , and that we 're going to pull America together again .
That doesn't mean we all have to agree . No two Americans agree a hundred percent , on anything , that 's part of our DNA , right ?
But we 've got to work together . That 's why I applaud and salute Harry 's years of service .
He got up every day working for you , making a difference for you .
And I 'm going to miss not working with him directly as he gets to leave and come home to the state that he loves .
But Harry , you better pick up the phone when I call , because I need your advice about how we 're going to do everything we need to .
So my friends , let 's join together for these next 96 days .
Let 's make sure we win Nevada and America and build the future that we all deserve .
Thank you and God bless you . Morning !
I am so pleased to be here , I want to thank you all for the invitation , for the introduction , to everyone associated with NABJ and NAHJ , I want to just mark the moment because you were created in this hotel .
I don't know if there are any original founders , but if there are could you all stand up and we could give you some recognition ?
I am delighted to thank you for the important work you do every day , and now more than ever we need you to keep holding leaders and candidates accountable .
And in the tradition of path-breaking journalists like Ethel Payne and Ruben Salazar , we need you to make sure that America 's front pages and nightly newscasts and online information reflects the great diversity of our nation .
Someone that I had the privilege of knowing , the late , great Bob Maynard , former owner of the Oakland Tribune , once said and I quote Bob
It is in seeing ourselves whole that we can begin to see ways of working out our differences of understanding our similarities , ' and becoming a more cohesive nation .
And that is what you do every day , helping us to see ourselves as whole .
You help us see ourselves whole . I 'm looking forward to our discussion , which I 'm sure will cover a wide range of issues , but I want to take just a few minutes to focus on a challenge that doesn't get enough attention out on the campaign trail , although I 've been trying , and that is : how do we expand economic opportunity for African Americans and Latinos across America ?
And you know very well , it 's been said that when the economy catches a cold , communities of color get pneumonia .
The Great Recession hit our whole country hard , but the toll was especially difficult for black and Latino families .
Black wealth was cut in half . For Latinos , it dropped 66 percent .
That represented decades , even generations of hard work . And during these past 18 months , people across the country have described to me how hard it 's been to get back on their feet in an economy that is still not working the way we all want to see it .
And barriers of systemic racism makes that even harder . Now I believe that President Obama does not get the credit he deserves for leading us out of the Great Recession , and I like to remind people he had nothing to do with creating it in the first place .
He came into office and this worst-of-all-financial-crises-since-the-Great-Depression was handed to him .
And I think if you fairly look at the record , you have to conclude that his leadership saved us from a Great Depression .
So as bad as things became 9 million jobs lost , 5 million homes lost , $13 trillion in family wealth wiped out as bad as it was , there 's no telling how far down we would have gone without his leadership .
So we are out of the ditch that we were in , and now we 've got to do even more .
We 've got to build on the progress we 've made .
15 million new jobs in the last seven years . 20 million people now have health insurance who did not have it before he became President .
So we 've got to have the will and the plans together to move forward .
That 's why I 've proposed a comprehensive new commitment to African American and Latino communities to make serious , sustained investments to create more good-paying jobs ; to help families build and rebuild wealth ; and support black- and Latin o-o wned small businesses .
For me , these aren't just economic issues they 're part of the long , continuing struggle for civil rights .
Rosa Parks opened up every seat on the bus . Now we 've got to expand economic opportunity so everyone can afford the fare .
And we have to make sure the bus route reaches every neighborhood , and connects families with safe , affordable housing and good jobs .
Sylvia Mendez and Ruby Bridges helped desegregate our schools . Now we 've got to help every family afford the books , computers and internet access that our kids need to learn in the 21st century .
And so in my first 100 days as President , we will work with both parties to pass the biggest investment in new , good-paying jobs since World War II .
That includes jobs in manufacturing , clean energy , technology and innovation , small businesses , and infrastructure .
If we invest in infrastructure now , we will not only create jobs today , we will lay the foundation for the jobs of the future .
We 're going to also focus on creating jobs in communities where unemployment remains stubbornly high after generations of underinvestment and neglect .
I 'm a big fan of Congressman Jim Clyburn 's 10-20-30 ' plan steering 10 percent of federal investment to neighborhoods where 20 percent of the population has been living below the poverty line for 30 years .
We need that kind of focused , targeted investment in urban places , rural places wherever Americans have been left out and left behind .
We 're also going to invest $20 billion in creating jobs for young people .
There 's a big gap here . The unemployment rate among Latino and African American youth is significantly higher than for whites .
You know , it 's hard to write a resume if you have nothing to put on it .
We 're going to help young people get that first job , so they can get that second job , so they can build a good solid middle-class life that will give them and their families a better future .
We 're going to do more to help black and Latino entrepreneurs get access to capital , so they have a real chance at turning their ideas into thriving businesses .
Now I think that 's not only good for those entrepreneurs
it 's good for their families , their workers , and their communities .
Additionally , as part of our end-to-end reform of the criminal justice system , we 're going to help people succeed when they return home from jail or prison .
We 're going to ban the box so they can be judged by their skills and talents , not by their past .
And we will dedicate $5 billion to provide training and support to returning citizens so they can get good-paying jobs .
And in my first 100 days , I 'm going to introduce legislation for comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship
that 's not only the right thing to do . Every independent analysis shows it will add hundreds of billions of dollars to our economy .
It will also keep families together . We need to bring hard-working people out of the shadows .
America has always been a place where people from around the world work hard and apply their talents to American growth and innovation in pursuit of their own dreams .
So we 're going to do everything we can to get this done .
We need to build an economy and a future that every American can be proud of and be a part of .
An economy that works for everyone , not just those at the top .
That will be my mission as President . These are just the highlights of our plan .
I hope you 'll go to my website , hillaryclinton.com to read the details , including how we 're going to pay for everything I 've proposed .
And of course I hope you 'll compare that to what my opponent is talking about .
Here 's one measure that you could use for that comparison : an independent economist recently calculated that , if my agenda for jobs and growth is put into place , our economy would create at least 10.4 million jobs within four years .
We actually think it could be much more than that .
Now this economist also ran the numbers on Donald Trump , including his disastrous and inhumane plan to round up and deport millions of hard-working immigrants .
The result , according to Mark Zandi , who was the economic advisor to John McCain during his 2008 run for the presidency , the result of Trump 's plans would be a lengthy recession ' with 3.4 million jobs lost .
Now of course , Trump 's problems go far beyond economics .
At every turn , he stokes division and resentment . He says horrible things about one group of Americans after another .
He 's harkening back to the most shameful chapters of our history and appealing to the ugliest impulses of our society .
You know the list , you 've reported on it .
He started his campaign by describing Mexican immigrants as criminals ' and rapists . '
He retweets white nationalists . He says a distinguished judge can't be trusted because he is of Mexican heritage .
He talks about banning Muslims from coming to the United States a land built on religious freedom .
And yes , he also talks about curtailing press freedom as well .
We need to stand up as a country , and say Donald Trump doesn't represent who we are and what we believe .
That is what my campaign , what Tim Kaine and I , and everyone supporting us , is doing every day .
And we 're going to keep at it . Because I believe with all my heart that America is better than this .
America is better than Donald Trump . We just launched an all-Spanish Twitter account , because we want to bring as many Americans as possible into this conversation .
We 've opened offices in every state , because we want to compete everywhere we want to bring our message and our vision to all corners of our country .
But we can't do it alone . Everyone Republican , Democrat , and independent needs to stand up and speak out .
And I think journalists have a special responsibility to our democracy in a time like this .
As Ida B . Wells once said , people must know before they can act , and there is no educator to compare to the press . '
Many of you are showing the way . It 's a badge of honor when Jorge Ramos gets thrown out of a press conference for challenging Donald Trump .
Or when another news organization gets banned for reporting what he says .
As Jorge said , the best journalism happens when you take a stand , when you denounce injustice .
So I hope you 'll keep calling it like you see it .
Keep holding all of us accountable . I have laid out all these plans , and I 'm well aware that I have been sometimes made fun of for putting out these plans about the economy and education and gun safety measures and all the rest of it .
But I have this old fashioned idea that when you run for President , you ought to tell the voters of America what you would do as President .
So I am going to keep telling you what I 'm going to do because I want you to hold me accountable , press and citizens alike .
Because the stakes are as high as they 've ever been in our lifetimes .
And we all have to do our part . So thank you for what you do everyday , thank you for inviting me to address you today .
And I look forward to taking some of your questions today .
Thank you all very much . Thank you so much , Mike and Leigh and everybody .
I am excited about being here , and I so appreciate what Mike and Leigh took their time to tell me about .
Because this company , which has grown pretty dramatically in the last four and a half years , is a great example of what it means to be a small business company that then grows and takes advantage of all the opportunities that are available .
And I was grateful when I asked both of them ,
So what would you want me to do ? What worked ?
What didn't ? ' that they gave me a terrific point of view .
And just to quickly recap , because I agree with everything they said , they got a lot of help from the SBA twice now
but they agree with me that the SBA is just not doing enough .
It 's not a its mandate is not big enough ; it doesn't include enough continuing help and outreach so that people with good ideas like they had know where to go , kind of a one-stop shop , if you will , to get all the information that they need .
And I 'm going to do everything I can to expand that mandate and to provide a much better conduit , to use Mike 's term , of information coming to people starting their small businesses .
The second thing they said which was exciting is that when they first opened up their very first
what do they call those big silver things ? Brew-house
their very first brew-house came from China . And then they found a local company not far from here who could do exactly the same thing , so all of these other brew-houses are made right here , about four or five miles right down the street .
BrewFab , right ? BrewFab . So that 's another thing I 'm pushing , is for companies to look to see if there aren't American suppliers who can actually provide what they need in order to have a great partnership .
And I 'm thrilled that what you see here illustrates that .
The third thing they told me is they had a great experience with the State Department , which I was very happy to hear , because when I was Secretary of State I really stressed exports , and you can't do exports unless you have an active group of people who are reaching out once again , trying to come up with support for businesses .
And my dad was a small businessman , a very , very small business that he started and ran , so I was particularly keen that we not just help the giant American corporations but we help the small businesses , the medium-sized businesses .
And Mike told me that he had a great experience on a State Department-sponsored visit to Costa Rica , right ?
To Costa Rica ? And that 's exactly what I want to see more of too , because you can't just expect to compete and win in the global economy by waiting for it to come to you , and you can't do it on your own , so it 's really important to me that the government does more to help companies like 3 Daughters get out into the world so that their products can be given an equal chance to compete and win .
Because I know that if we do that , nobody can outcompete American workers and businesses .
We just have to be out there doing everything possible to make it reality .
And then the final thing that I picked up from talking to both of them is how committed they are to their employees , but how they could sure use some help finding out what are all of the benefits and opportunities that are available through the federal government through the tax system , for example .
How can we do a better job making sure that small companies like this have the help they need to understand everything that they have to do and cut the costs and streamline it .
So , for example , they were telling me that if they could get a kind of package of help
because right now , employees spend a lot of time figuring out excise tax , which is pretty complicated , and I want to try to blow through all that , simplify it , flatten it , make it possible for companies like this to get the information .
And they came up with a really good suggestion : people who register LLCs , if they 're going to have employees , they should immediately get a package of information , like here 's how you can get help understanding what you have to do to register in different jurisdictions to pay taxes in different jurisdictions and the like . As much as we can simplify and use technology to simplify , the cheaper then it will be for companies like this to be successful and to grow as quickly as this one has .
So I feel like I 've learned a lot today .
I really appreciate your being so well prepared to give me these great ideas that I can then try to take and put to work on behalf of businesses like yours and businesses across the country .
Because it really is true that I feel a special bond with small businesses , and I have said that I want to be a small business president because of my dad 's experience , and this is one of the big differences between me and the Republican nominee .
My dad worked really hard . He ran a small print plant so that in a much lower-ceilinged , darker room , he had long tables that he would roll fabric out on and then he would take a silkscreen and he would do all this by hand you put the silkscreen down , you put the paint in , you take a squeegee , you go from side to side and then you pick it up and you go down all the way to the end of the long table , then you 'd go to the other table , so that while this table was drying then you 'd come up and if there was a two-color pattern , you 'd put another silkscreen on and you 'd do it all over again .
So he worked really hard and made a good living for my mother , my brothers and me , and that 's why I just can't imagine
he worked so hard if he had delivered the finished goods to the people who had ordered them , that they would have said , We 're not going to pay you . '
And that 's what Trump has done time and time again .
It would be like you 'd get a big order from one of his resorts or casinos .
That would be pretty exciting here . And people would work really hard .
And then they wouldn't pay you . Or maybe they 'd say , we 're only going to pay you 50 cents or 30 cents on the dollar .
I just can't imagine . I know what it would mean to my family , but I can't imagine what it would mean to any family .
And in fact , just recently there most people who are in that position that I 've met who have been stiffed by him , they were told ,
Well , go sue us . ' Well , people can't afford to sue somebody who hires a bunch of lawyers in order to fight back .
It just doesn't make sense . But there was a small mom-and-pop shop down in South Florida that did sue him because they had helped renovate one of his golf courses .
And they knew that if they didn't get paid , it was over for them .
They couldn't keep their doors open . So they did sue him , and they got a judgment , and then they even got attorneys ' fees .
So maybe the tide is turning because I 've met painters and plumbers and glass installers and marble installers and architects and piano companies that have been operating under a contract which then was never honored .
And the most fundamental thing in our economic system is you make a contract .
You make a deal with somebody . You keep your end of the bargain .
They keep their end of the bargain . That 's how we do business , and that 's how we 're going to continue to grow small businesses in America .
Because I think Mike told me that there are 52 employees , 18 full-time .
Right ? Small businesses create most of the jobs in America , two-thirds .
So we can't grow the economy if we don't really grow small businesses .
And I 'm going to do everything I can in this campaign and then in the White House to be a great president for small business , and to consult people like Mike and Leigh who can give me firsthand , real information about what works and what doesn't work so that we don't get this big disconnect where you 're trying to do something , and it 's just not working .
And the final thing that make said , which I am going to be doing everything I can , is to get health care costs down .
We 've got a lot of people who are insured now because of the Affordable Care Act , but the costs are too high .
We need to get prescription drug costs down and premiums and copays and all of the costs because other companies have told me the very same thing .
And so I 'm going to be working hard on that as well .
So again , let me thank you for having us here .
I want to say hello to everybody , maybe get some pictures if you wanted to , and have a chance if anybody has any other ideas about how we 're going to promote and grow small businesses .
And again , Leigh was telling me about the meaning of the flags here as well , and I bet in a few years you 're going to have flags hanging from every part of this ceiling as a real tribute to the people who have served our country .
And I greatly appreciate that as well . Thank you all very much .
Thank you ! Thank you so much . I have to tell you , I am thrilled to be here for a number of reasons .
First , it 's wonderful to be back in Michigan .
You can really feel the energy and dynamism that is driving this state 's comeback .
And in Detroit , we 've got new businesses that are opening .
Neighborhoods like Midtown and Eastern Market are coming back . The auto industry just had its best year ever .
Over in Ann Arbor , high tech firms are thriving .
The next generation of engineers are getting trained up in Houghton .
And here at Futuramic so well named you are on the front lines of what I believe will be a true manufacturing renaissance in America .
And I just was given a short , but exciting , tour by Mark Jurcak and John Couch , who were telling me about how this company was started as , and for most of its early history , was an auto supply company .
And then in 2000 as the market began to change and some of the auto companies began to realign , they were faced with a choice .
We all face choices in life , don't we ? And this company could have just said ,
Hey , you know , our business is not going to be what it was , we 've got to just fold up , let 's just kind of quit .
But that 's not what happened here , and what happened here is what can happen across America .
You are in now , what is largely an aerospace company .
And because of the work force and the work ethic and the commitment of Futuramic , you are seeing the future unfold .
So I got to see what 's happening here to help build the SLS rocket that is going to go from Macomb to Mars .
I saw the two halves of an F-35 nose cone waiting to be put together .
I talked with some of the workers about the absolute perfection that is required to do this work .
And what I believe with all my heart , is that what 's happening here can happen in so many places if we put our minds to it .
If we support advanced manufacturing . If we are the kind of country that once again understands how important it is the build things .
We are builders and we need to get back to building !
So we 're making progress , none of us can be satisfied until the economic revitalization we 're seeing in some parts of Michigan reaches every community .
But it is inspiring to see this combination of old-fashioned hard work and cutting-edge innovation .
And I know my opponent in this election was here in Michigan about a week ago , and it was like he was in a different place .
When he visited Detroit on Monday , he talked only of failure , poverty , and crime .
He 's missing so much about what makes Michigan great .
And the same is true when it comes to our country .
He describes America as an embarrassment . He said and I quote
We 're becoming a third-world country . Look around you , my friends .
Go visit with the workers building rockets . That doesn't happen in third world countries .
Now we have a lot of urgent and important work to do and that 's what I 'm going to talk about today because all the people that I 've met in this campaign really prove how wrong this negative , pessimistic view is .
America 's best days are still ahead of us if we make up our minds to actually go out and make that happen .
Just consider our assets : We have the most dynamic , productive workforce in the world , bar none .
We have the most innovative businesses . The top colleges , universities , community colleges , training programs in the world .
And the best science and technology . We have enormous capacity for clean energy production .
We are resilient , determined , hard-working . There is nothing America can't do if we do it together .
And I know this because this is how I was raised .
And I don't think Mr. Trump understands any of it .
He hasn't offered any credible solutions for the very real economic challenges we face .
Those challenges emerged long before the Great Recession , and they have persisted through our recovery .
There is too much inequality , too little upward mobility .
It is just too hard to get ahead today . But there are common-sense things that your government could do that would give Americans more opportunities to succeed .
Why don't we do it ? Because powerful special interests and the tendency to put ideology ahead of political progress have led to gridlock in Congress .
How can you not be frustrated , and even angry , when you see nothing getting done ?
And a lot of people feel no one is on their side and no one has their back and that is not how it 's supposed to be in America .
If I am fortunate enough to be your President , I will have your back every single day that I serve .
My mission in the White House will be to make our economy work for everyone , not just those at the top .
This is personal for me . I am the product of the American middle class , I was born in Chicago , I was raised in a suburb .
But my grandfather worked at the Scranton lace mill in Scranton , Pennsylvania , for 50 years .
And because he worked hard , my Dad was able to go to college , and eventually start his own small business and then send me out into the world to follow my dreams .
No matter how far those dreams have taken me , I have always remembered , I 'm the daughter of a small-business owner and the granddaughter of a factory worker and proud of both .
So here 's what I want . I want every American family to be able to tell the same story .
If you work hard , you do your part , you should be able to give your children all the opportunities they deserve .
That is the basic bargain of America . Now whether we will be able to renew that bargain on even better terms for the 21st century depends in large measure , on the outcome of this election .
So here are four questions that I hope the American people will ask of both candidates and that the answers should make your choice in November crystal clear :
First , which candidate has a real plan to create good-paying jobs ?
Second , who will restore fairness to our economy and ensure that those at the top pay their fair share of taxes ?
Third , who will really go to bat for working families ?
And fourth , who can bring people together to deliver results that will make a difference in your lives ?
Now I hope that after giving a fair hearing to both sides , you will join the millions of people across our country supporting this campaign not just Democrats , but a growing number of Republicans and Independents as well .
Now when it comes to creating jobs , I would argue it 's not even close .
Even conservative experts say Trump 's agenda will pull our economy back into recession .
And according to an independent analysis by a former economic advisor to Senator John McCain , if you add up all of Trump 's ideas from cutting taxes for the wealthy and corporations , to starting a trade war with China , to deporting millions of hard-working immigrants the result would be a loss of 3.4 million jobs .
By contrast , the same analyst found that with our plans , the economy would create more than 10 million new jobs .
So let me tell you how we would do that .
I believe every American willing to work hard should be able to find a job that provides dignity , pride and decent pay that can support a family .
So starting on Day One , we will work with both parties to pass the biggest investment in new , good-paying jobs since World War II .
We will put Americans to work building and modernizing our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our railways , our ports , our airports .
We are way overdue for this , my friends . We are living off the investments that were made by our parents ' and grandparents ' generations .
We will also help cities like Detroit and Flint connect underserved neighborhoods to opportunity , expanding affordable housing , and we will repair schools and failing water systems as well .
You know , I happen to think we should be ambitious : while we 're at it , let 's connect every household in America to broadband by the year 2020 .
It 's astonishing to me how many places in America , not way , way far away from cities , but in cities and near cities that don't have access to broadband . And that disadvantages kids who are asked to do homework using the internet .
5 million of them live in homes without access to the internet .
So you talk about an achievement gap , it starts right there .
And let 's build a cleaner , more resilient power grid with enough renewable energy to power every home in our country as well .
Some country is going to be the clean energy superpower of the 21st century and create millions of jobs and businesses .
It 's probably going to be either China , Germany , or America .
I want it to be us ! We invent the technology , we should make it and use it and export it , which will help to grow our economy .
And here 's something that you don't always hear enough of from Democrats : a big part of our plan will be unleashing the power of the private sector to create more jobs at higher pay .
And that means for us , creating an infrastructure bank to get private funds off the sidelines and complement our private investments .
$25 billion in government seed funding could unlock more than $250 billion and really get our country moving on our infrastructure plans .
And we 're going to invest $10 billion in what we 're calling Make it in America partnerships to support American manufacturing and recommit to scientific research that can create entire new industries .
When Mark and John were giving me the tour and I was talking to some of the workers along the way , and asking them where some of the precision machinery came from that is being used here at Futuramic .
What I hear all over the country , Germany , Japan , Italy .
I want to bring that precision manufacturing back to the United States .
There is no reason we can't begin to make those machines ourselves and supply the rest of the world instead of buying from somewhere else .
Let 's also expand incentives like the New Markets Tax Credit that can bring business , government , and communities together to create good jobs in places that have been left out or left behind .
From neglected neighborhoods in Detroit and Flint , to Logging Country , Coal Country , Native American communities , from rural areas ravaged by addiction and lost jobs to industrial regions hollowed out when factories closed .
As President , I will also make a major push to empower small businesses and entrepreneurs , with new national initiatives to cut red tape at every level and expand access to credit , especially through community banks and credit unions .
I will propose a new plan to dramatically simplify tax filing for small businesses .
Right now , the smallest businesses , the kind that my dad had , because it was a really small company , spend 20 times more per employee to prepare their taxes compared to larger companies .
It should be as easy as printing out a bank statement .
Let 's free entrepreneurs to do what they do best innovate , grow , and hire .
As Mark said , this company started because of a drive down a road and thinking about it , talking about it , then seeing one of the old Oldsmobile Futuramics and thinking
Hey , not only do I have an idea , I 've got a name .
In America , if you can dream it , you should be able to build it , and we 're going to get back to doing that .
Now Donald Trump has a different view . He 's made a career out of stiffing small businesses from Atlantic City to Las Vegas .
There are companies that were left hanging because he refused to pay their bills .
A lot of those companies scraped together what the could to pay their employees , and many of them put their businesses at risk and some of them ended up taking bankruptcy .
It wasn't because Trump couldn't pay them , it was because he wouldn't pay them .
And that 's why I take it personally . My dad ran a printing plant .
He had two really long tables , he printed fabric for draperies .
He would lay out the fabric and then he would take a silkscreen and he would go down the table .
Put the silkscreen down , he 'd put the paint in , he take the squeegee , he 'd go across the screen , he 'd lift it up , he 'd go down , go down all the way to the end .
And then he 'd start on the other table . He worked hard .
And then when he finished , he would load all that fabric up , put it into his car , and take it to the business that had ordered it , maybe a restaurant or a hotel or some office .
He expected to be paid when he showed up . He did the work .
He paid for the supplies and the labor he often hired to help him on big jobs .
He expected to be paid . I can't imagine what would have happened to my father and his business if he had gotten a contract from Trump .
And showing up and submitting his bill and being told , We 're not going to pay .
And if you don't like it , sue us .
My father never could have sued a big organization like that .
I just don't understand it . I 've met all kinds of workers , painters , plumbers .
I 've met small businesses that provided pianos , installed glass or marble , all of whom were denied payment , and after going back time and again , being told ,
Well , maybe we 'll pay you 30 cents on the dollar or 50 cents on the dollar .
That 's not how we do business in America .
So we 've got to create more jobs that are going to help more people .
For example , our modern service economy is empowering consumers with more choices and greater flexibility .
But we need to do more to empower the workers in our service sector too .
The people taking care of our children and our parents , they deserve a good wage , good benefits , and a secure retirement .
And , it 's crucial that every American have access to the education and skills they need to get the jobs of the future .
So we will fight to make college tuition-free for the middle class and debt-free for everyone .
We will also liberate millions of people who already have student debt by making it easier to refinance and repay what you owe as a portion of your income so you don't have to pay more than you can afford .
It 's just not right that Donald Trump can ignore his debts , but students and families can't refinance their debt .
And here 's something else I really want to emphasize , because I don't think anyone in America is talking about this enough and that is : a four year degree should not be the only path to a good job in America .
You should be able to learn a skill , practice a trade , and make a good living doing it .
So many Americans have the talent and the will to succeed whether they 're kids right out of high school or older people displaced by automation and outsourcing .
For too long , big promises about the power of training and retraining haven't delivered like they should .
It doesn't help anyone to be trained for a job that doesn't exist .
So here 's what we 're going to do . We will support high-quality union training programs .
We will propose new tax credits to encourage more companies to offer paid apprenticeships that let you earn while you learn .
We will do more , including a national campaign , to dignify skills training across the board .
I think we 've got to reverse what has become a kind of commonplace view , which is everybody needs to go to college .
Well in fact , more than half of the jobs that are going to be available in 2020 do not require a college , four-year degree .
So , for welders and machinists and tool and die makers and health technicians and coders and so many others , let 's get the word out .
There are really good jobs for people right now , and there will be more in the future if you get the skills in high school , at community college , in an apprenticeship or other training programs .
And I want to acknowledge the great role that the community college here in Macomb County has played in working with companies like this one to make sure people do have the skills .
Now , I imagine some of you I 'm sure some of you are thinking ,
Well , that all sounds good , but what about trade ?
After all , Trump talks about it all the time .
Well , let 's start with this : It 's true that too often , past trade deals have been sold to the American people with rosy scenarios that did not pan out .
Those promises now ring hollow in many communities across Michigan and our country that have seen factories close and jobs disappear .
Too many companies lobbied for trade deals so they could sell products abroad but then they instead moved abroad and sold back into the United States .
It is also true that China and other countries have gamed the system for too long .
Enforcement particularly during the Bush administration has been too lax .
Investments at home that would make us more competitive have been completely blocked in Congress .
And American workers and communities have paid the price . But the answer is not to rant and rave or cut ourselves off from the world .
That would end up killing even more jobs . The answer is to finally make trade work for us , not against us .
So my message to every worker in Michigan and across America is this : I will stop any trade deal that kills jobs or holds down wages including the Trans-Pacific Partnership .
I oppose it now , I 'll oppose it after the election , and I 'll oppose it as President .
As a Senator from New York , I fought to defend New York 's manufacturers and steel-makers from unfair Chinese trading practices .
And I opposed the only multilateral trade deal that came before the Senate while I was there , because it didn't meet my high bar .
As Secretary of State , I fought hard for American businesses to get a fair shot around the world and to stop underhanded trading practices like currency manipulation and the theft of intellectual property .
So as President , I will stand up to China and anyone else who tries to take advantage of American workers and companies .
And I 'm going to ramp up enforcement by appointing , for the first time , a chief trade prosecutor , I will triple the number of enforcement officers , and when countries break the rules , we won't hesitate to impose targeted tariffs .
Now Mr. Trump may talk a big game on trade , but his approach is based on fear , not strength .
Fear that we can't compete with the rest of the world even when the rules are fair .
Fear that our country has no choice but to hide behind walls .
If Team USA was as fearful as Trump , Michael Phelps and Simone Biles would be cowering in the locker room , afraid to come out to compete .
Instead , they 're winning gold medals . America isn't afraid to compete .
Right now , thousands of Michigan companies are exporting billions of dollars of products around the world .
We want them to sell even more , and create more jobs here at home .
But corporations should not abandon profitable operations here in the United States to move abroad , just to give shareholders a quicker return , CEOs a bigger bonus , and unions a weaker hand to play .
Now , before he tweets about how he 's really one who will put America First in trade , let 's remember where Trump makes many of his own products .
Because it sure is not America . He 's made Trump ties in China and Trump suits in Mexico instead of here in Michigan .
He keeps saying it 's not possible to make these things in America anymore , and that 's just wrong .
So we created a website hillaryclinton.com/make-it-here on it we list a hundred places across the United States that already producing similar goods .
Now one positive thing Trump could do to make America great again is actually make great things in America again .
Now , let 's look at the second question : which candidate will fight for fairness ?
And this is an urgent need . We need to grow the economy and we need to make it fairer .
The tide is not rising fast enough , and it 's certainly not lifting all boats .
Since the crash , too many of the gains have gone to the top one percent .
The rules and incentives in our system reward corporations for putting shor t-t erm stock prices above long-term investments in their workers , equipment , and research .
While corporate profits are at near-record highs , paychecks for most people have barely budged .
Incomes aren't growing fast enough to keep up with costs like prescription drugs and child care .
I believe that every employee , from the CEO suite to the factory floor , contributes to a business ' success , so everybody should share in the rewards especially those putting in long hours for little pay .
So I 'm proposing a new tax credit to encourage more companies to share profits with workers .
More broadly , we will fight for a more progressive , more patriotic tax code that puts American jobs first .
Right now , when a corporation outsources jobs and production , it can write off the costs .
We must stop that , and we must make them pay back any tax breaks they received from any level of government in our country .
For those that move their headquarters overseas to avoid paying their fair share of taxes , they 're going to have to pay a new exit tax .
So if they want to go , they 're going to have to pay to go .
And Wall Street , corporations , and the super-rich , should finally pay their fair share of taxes .
That 's why I support the so-called Buffett Rule , because multi-millionaires should not be able to pay a lower tax rate than their secretaries .
We should also add a new tax on multi-millionaires , crack down on tax gaming by corporations and close the carried interest loophole something I 've advocated for years .
Now , compare what Trump says . Now there is a myth out there that he 'll stick it to the rich and powerful because , somehow , he 's really on the side of the little guy .
Don't believe it . Not when he pledges to rip up basic rules that hold corporations accountable , when he wants to scrap regulations that stop polluters from poisoning the air our children breathe and the water we drink , let insurance companies write their own rules again .
Trump would roll back the tough rules that we have imposed on the Financial Industry .
I 'll do the opposite I think we should strengthen those rules so that Wall Street can never wreck Main Street again .
Trump even wants to abolish the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau , a new agency that has already returned more than $11 billion to 25 million Americans who were taken advantage of by corporations .
Why would you get rid of that ? And then there is Trump 's tax plan .
He would give trillions in tax cuts to big corporations , millionaires , and Wall Street money managers .
That would explode our national debt and eventually lead to massive cuts in priorities like education , healthcare , and environmental protection .
In his speech on Monday , he called for a new tax loophole
let 's call it the Trump Loophole because it would allow him to pay less than half the current tax rate on income from many of his companies .
He 'd pay a lower rate than millions of middle class families .
One nonpartisan expert at the Tax Policy Center described this plan as , and I quote , a really nice deal for Donald Trump .
Of course , it 's hard to say how nice , because he refuses to do what every other presidential candidate in decades has done and release his tax returns .
But we do know that the 400 richest taxpayers in America would get an average tax cut of more than $15 million a year from the Trump loophole .
Then there 's the Estate Tax , which Trump wants to eliminate altogether .
If you believe that he 's as wealthy as he says , that alone would save the Trump family $4 billion .
It would do nothing for 99.8 percent of Americans . So they 'd get a $4 billion tax cut , and 99.8 percent of Americans get nothing .
Just think about what we could do with those $4 billion dollars .
We could pay for more than 47,000 veterans to get a 4-year college degree .
We could provide a year 's worth of health care to nearly 3 million kids .
Or we could fund about a year 's worth of federal assistance to state and local law enforcement .
I think there are a lot of better ways to spend the money .
On Monday , I 'm going to be in Scranton , Pennsylvania , with Vice President Biden .
He has a saying : Don't tell me what you value .
Show me your budget and I will tell you what you value .
Well , Donald Trump wants to give trillions in tax breaks to people like himself .
I want to invest it in veterans , our kids , our police officers , and so much more .
And you can then draw your own conclusions about values .
Now , it 's true that both of us have proposed to cut taxes for middle class families .
He 's making a big promise . But his advisors have said , his own advisors have said , he may not stand by them .
Instead , the tax cuts he doubled down on in his speech in Detroit on Monday offer trillions to the richest Americans and corporations .
One of the differences between Donald Trump and me is I 'm telling you what I will do , I 'm laying out my plans , and I will stand by them , and I want you to hold me accountable for delivering results .
This all reminds me of that old saying , if it sounds too good to be true , it probably is .
And that brings us to the third question : Which candidate can you actually count on to go to bat for workers and working families ?
It 's not enough to pay lip service to being on your side .
We have to recognize how Americans actually live and work in the 21st century and then offer real solutions that make your lives easier .
We know that women are now the sole or primary breadwinner in a growing number of families .
We know more Americans are cobbling together part time work , or striking out on their own .
So we have to make it easier to be good workers , good parents , and good caregivers , all at the same time .
That 's why I 've set out a bold vision to make quality , affordable childcare available to all Americans and limit the costs to 10 percent of family income .
On Monday , Trump offered his first real ideas on this topic .
Because previously , he dismissed concerns about childcare . He said it was , quote , not an expensive thing because you just need some blocks and some swings .
Now he says he wants to exclude childcare payments from taxation .
His plan was panned from the left , the right , the center
because it transparently is designed for rich people like him .
He would give wealthy families 30 or 40 cents on the dollar for their nannies , and little or nothing for millions of hard-working families trying to afford childcare so they can get to work and keep the job .
I think instead we should expand the Child Tax Credit to provide real relief to tens of millions of working families struggling with the costs of raising children the same families that his plan ignores .
And that 's just the start . Because the more we do to help working families , the more our entire economy will benefit .
For example , guaranteeing equal pay won't just increase paychecks for women it will boost family budgets and get incomes rising across the board .
And I don't understand why Trump 's against that . Paid family leave won't only make life easier for Moms and Dads it will also keep skilled , talented Americans in the workforce and grow our economy .
That 's why every other advanced country already has it .
Again , he 's against it . Raising the federal minimum wage won't just put more money in the pockets of low-income families it also means they will spend more at the businesses in their neighborhoods .
Trump 's against that as well . This is something that even the original automakers understood , way back at the beginning of the 20th century , when they decided to pay the unbelievable sum of $5 a day to autoworkers .
And when they were criticized by other businesses , How can you pay that much ?
they had the best answer , We want people to be able to buy our cars .
This is Economics 101 , we need to get incomes and wages rising and it will help the whole economy grow and be fairer .
And protecting and expanding Social Security doesn't just help older Americans retire with dignity it helps to ease burdens on families and communities .
And I also believe the same thing about comprehensive immigration reform .
We already have millions of people working in the economy and paying $12 billion a year to Social Security even though they are undocumented .
So by moving toward reform , we will unleash a lot of new income and growth , and we will level the playing field so that American workers can't be taken advantage of because undocumented workers can be exploited by employers , which is one of the reasons we have this disconnect .
And finally , strengthening unions doesn't just serve members it leads to better pay and benefits , and working conditions for all employees .
I 've also said I will defend and improve the Affordable Care Act , and for me , that includes giving Americans , in every state , a choice of a public option health insurance plan that will help everybody afford coverage , it will strengthen competition , and drive down costs .
Now these are all causes I 've worked on for decades and I believe they point to a fundamental truth about our economy .
It can seem like a zero sum , when you are competing for a job , a promotion , or a contract if someone wins and someone loses , but that is not the full picture .
If you step back , you 'll see we 're all in this together .
If we can grow together , we can all rise together .
Because , you know what I like to say , we are stronger together , and that 's why the fourth question is key .
And it 's this : who can bring people together to get any of this done ?
Right ? Well , I believe I can because I think I can provide serious , steady leadership that can find common ground and build on it based on hard , but respectful bargaining with the other side .
Leadership that rises above personal attacks and name calling , not revels in it .
I just don't think insults and bullying is how we 're going to get things done .
And I don't think that 's the appropriate approach for us .
I know it 's hard to imagine , but there was a time when Democrats and Republicans actually worked together .
I know that 's true , I did it as First Lady , Senator , and Secretary of State .
It 's how we created the Children 's Health Insurance Program , which covers 8 million kids .
It 's how we rebuilt New York after 9/11 , and how we passed a treaty reducing the threat from Russia 's nuclear weapons .
So I am convinced based on my experience , that we can do this .
And one of the reasons that I asked Tim Kaine to be my running mate is he also has a record of working across the aisle to get things done as a mayor , governor , and a Senator .
So we 're going to make full use of the White House 's power to convene .
We 're going to get everyone at the table not just Republicans and Democrats , but businesses and labor unions , academics and experts , but , most importantly , Americans , like all of you .
I think there are a lot of great ideas out in America , and I want you to have a say in your government .
And that means we have to get unaccountable money out of our politics , overturn Citizens United , and expand voting rights , not restrict them .
I intend , starting even before the election , to bring together leaders from across our economy , from a lot of different places to talk about jobs , and competitiveness , and I hope Mark and John can join me , because we need the best ideas that are out there making a difference .
We need to pull together . The bottom line is this : I 'm running for President to build an economy that works for everyone , not just those at the top .
And based on what we know from the Trump campaign , he wants America to work for him and his friends , at the expense of everyone else .
He 's offered no credible plans to address what working families are up against today .
Nothing on student loans or the cost of prescription drugs .
Nothing for farmers or struggling rural communities . Nothing to build a new future with clean energy and advanced agriculture .
Nothing for communities of color in our cities to overcome the barriers of systemic racism .
Nothing to create new opportunities for young people . Just a more extreme version of the failed theory of trickle-down economics , with his own addition of outlandish Trumpian ideas that even Republicans reject .
And as we heard him say at his convention , he may believe that he alone can fix our country , but clearly , he doesn't know the people of Michigan .
He doesn't see the businesses , and labor unions , the local governments , the clergy coming together every single day to make things better .
So yes , there is still a long road ahead , but Michigan is on the rise .
And everyone is contributing . That 's America at its best .
So I hope you will stay active and engaged and working together to create jobs and strengthen your own communities .
And I hope you will work to get out the vote in November , because if we are able to win , then I want you all to work with me to build the kind of progress that America deserves to see .
We 're going to do this together . We are stronger together .
Let 's go out and build the future ! Thank you all , God bless you !
Thank you . Thank you so much . I am so thrilled to be back in Reno !
Thank you . I have to say though , I know when I 'm back here in Reno , I 'm the other Hillary , and I am more than okay with that , because I think your mayor is doing a terrific job .
The fact that she herself is a small business woman and really committed to really lifting up Reno and giving everybody in this great city , the biggest little city with a great heart , a chance to get ahead and stay ahead .
I could not be more honored than to have her support and endorsement in this race , so thank you .
Let me also thank Dr. Karen Hilersin and others at Truckee Meadows Community College .
I love community colleges and I know something about what this college is doing to give people of all ages , not just young people , a real chance to get the skills and opportunities that everyone in America deserves , so thank you .
Now I have to begin by saying my original plan for this visit was to focus on our agenda to help small businesses and entrepreneurs .
This week we proposed new steps to cut red tape and taxes , to make it easier for small businesses to get the credit they need to grow and hire .
I want to be a small business president . My father was a small businessman .
And I believe that in America , if you can dream it , you should be able to build it .
We 'll be talking a lot more small business and about our economic plans in the days and weeks ahead .
But today , here in this community college devoted to opening minds and creating great understanding in this world and the place we live .
I want to address something I hear from Americans all over our country .
Everywhere I go , people tell me how concerned they are by the divisive rhetoric coming from my opponent in this election .
I understand that concern because it 's like nothing we 've heard before from a nominee for President of the United States from one of our two major parties .
From the start , Donald Trump has built his campaign on prejudice and paranoia .
He is taking hate groups mainstream and helping a radical fringe take over the Republican party .
His disregard for the values that make our country great is profoundly dangerous .
In just the past week , under the guise of outreach to African Americans , Trump has stood up in front of largely white audiences and described black communities in such insulting and ignorant terms .
Poverty . Rejection . Horrible education . No housing .
No homes . No ownership . Crime at levels nobody has seen .
Right now , he said , you walk down the street and get shot .
Those are his words . But when I hear them , I think to myself how sad .
Donald Trump misses so much , he doesn't see . This is a man who clearly doesn't know about Black America and doesn't care about Black America .
Donald Trump misses so much . He doesn't see the success of black leaders in every field , the vibrancy of the black-owned businesses , or the strength of the black church .
He doesn't see the excellence of historically black colleges and universities or the pride of black parents watching their children thrive .
He apparently didn't see Police Chief Brown on television after the murder of five of his officers conducting himself with such dignity .
And he certainly doesn't have any solutions to take on the reality of systemic racism and create more equity and opportunity in communities of color and for every American .
It really does take a lot of nerve to ask people he 's ignored and mistreated for decades ,
What do you have to lose ? Because the answer is everything .
Now , Trump 's lack of knowledge or experience or solutions would be bad enough .
But what he 's doing here is more sinister . Trump is reinforcing harmful stereotypes and offering a dog whistle to his most hateful supporters .
It 's a disturbing preview of what kind of President he 'd be .
And that 's what I want to make clear today : A man with a long history of racial discrimination , who traffics in dark conspiracy theories drawn from the pages of supermarket tabloids and the far , dark reaches of the internet , should never run our government or command our military .
Ask yourself , if he doesn't respect all Americans , how can he serve all Americans ?
Now , I know that some people still want to give Trump the benefit of the doubt .
They hope that he will eventually reinvent himself that there 's a kinder , gentler , more responsible Donald Trump waiting in the wings somewhere .
Because after all , it 's hard to believe anyone let alone a nominee for president could really believe all the things he says .
But here 's the hard truth , there is no other Donald Trump .
This is it . And Maya Angelou , a great American who I admire very much , she once said : When someone shows you who they are , believe them the first time .
Well , throughout his career and this campaign , Donald Trump has shown us exactly who he is .
And I think we should believe him . When he was getting his start in business , he was sued by the Justice Department for refusing to rent apartments to black and Latino tenants .
Their applications would be marked with a C
C for colored and then rejected .
Three years later , the Justice Department took Trump back to court because he hadn't changed .
And the pattern continued through the decades . State regulators fined one of Trump 's casinos for repeatedly removing black dealers from the floor .
No wonder the turnover rate for his minority employees was way above average .
And let 's not forget that Trump first gained political prominence leading the charge for the so-called Birthers .
He promoted the racist lie that President Obama is not really an American citizen part of a sustained effort to delegitimize America 's first black President .
In 2015 , Trump launched his own campaign for President with another racist lie .
He described Mexican immigrants as rapists and criminals . And he accused the Mexican government of actively sending them across the border .
None of that is true . Oh , and by the way , by the way , Mexico 's not paying for his wall either .
If he ever tries to get it built , the American taxpayer will pay for it .
We 'll be stuck with the bill . But there has been a steady stream of bigotry coming from him .
We all remember when Trump said a distinguished federal judge born in Indiana couldn't be trusted to do his job because , quote , He 's a Mexican . Think about that .
The man who today is the standard bearer of the Republican Party said a federal judge , who by the way , had a distinguished career , who had to go into hiding because Mexican drug gangs were after him , who has Mexican heritage but who just like me was born in this country , is somehow incapable solely because of his heritage .
Even the Republican Speaker of the House , Paul Ryan , described that as the textbook definition of a racist comment .
To this day , Trump has never apologized to Judge Curiel .
But for Trump , that is just par for the course .
This is someone who retweets white supremacists online , like the user who goes by the name white-genocide-TM . Trump took this fringe bigot with a few dozen followers and spread his message to 11 million people .
His campaign famously posted an anti-Semitic image a Star of David imposed over a sea of dollar bills that first appeared on white supremacist websites .
The Trump campaign has also selected a prominent white nationalist leader as a delegate in California .
And they only dropped him under pressure . When asked in a nationally televised interview whether he would disavow the support of David Duke , a former grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan , Trump wouldn't do it .
Only later , again under mounting pressure , did he backtrack .
And when Trump was asked about anti-Semitic slurs and death threats coming from his supporters , he refused to condemn them .
Through it all , he has continued pushing discredited conspiracy theories with racist undertones .
You remember , he said that thousands of American Muslims in New Jersey cheered the 9/11 attacks .
They didn't . He suggested that Senator Ted Cruz 's father was involved in the Kennedy assassination .
Perhaps in Trump 's mind , because Mr. Cruz was a Cuban immigrant , he must have had something to do with it .
And there is absolutely , of course , no evidence of that .
Just recently , Trump claimed that President Obama founded ISIS .
And then he repeated that over and over again . His latest paranoid fever dream is about my health .
All I can say is , Donald , dream on .
But , but my friends but my friends , this is what happens when you treat the National Enquirer like Gospel .
They said in October I 'd be dead in six months .
It 's also what happens when you listen to the radio host Alex Jones , who claims that 9/11 and the Oklahoma City bombings were inside jobs .
He even said , and this really is just so disgusting , he even said that the victims of the Sandy Hook massacre were child actors and no one was actually killed there .
I don't know what actually happens in somebody 's mind or how dark their heart must be , to say something like that .
But Trump didn't challenge those lies . He went on Jones ' show and said ,
Your reputation is amazing . I will not let you down .
This from the man who wants to be President of the United States .
I 've stood by President Obama 's side as he made the toughest decisions a Commander-in-Chief has to make .
In times of crisis , our country depends on steady leadership , clear thinking , calm judgment , because one wrong move can mean the difference between life and death .
I know we have veterans here and I know we have families mothers and spouses and children of people who are currently serving .
The last thing we need in the Situation Room is a loose cannon who can't tell the difference , or doesn't care to , between fact and fiction , and who buys so easily into racially-tinged rumors .
Someone so detached from reality should never be in charge of making decisions that are as real as they come .
That is yet another reason why Donald Trump is simply temperamentally unfit to be President of the United States .
Now , I hear and I read some people who are saying that his bluster and bigotry is just over-heated campaign rhetoric
an outrageous person saying outrageous things for attention . But look at his policies .
The ones that Trump has proposed , they would put prejudice into practice .
And don't be distracted by his latest efforts to muddy the waters .
He may have some new people putting new words in his mouth , but we know where he stands .
He would form a deportation force to round up millions of immigrants and kick them out of the country .
He 'd abolish the bedrock constitutional principle that says if you 're born in the United States , you 're an American citizen .
He says that children born to undocumented parents in America are anchor babies and should be deported .
Millions of them . He 'd ban Muslims around the world from entering our country just because of their religion .
Think about that for a minute . How would it actually work ?
People landing in U.S. airports would line up to get their passports stamped , just like they do now .
But in Trump 's America , when they step up to the counter , the immigration officer would ask every single person ,
What is your religion ? And then what ? What if someone says , I 'm a Christian , but the agent doesn't believe him ?
Do they have to prove it ? How would they do that ?
Really , ever since the Pilgrims landed on Plymouth Rock , America has distinguished itself as a haven for people fleeing religious persecution , believing in religious freedom and religious liberty .
Under Donald Trump , America would distinguish itself as the only country in the world to impose a religious test at the border .
Now come to think of it , there actually may be one other place that does that .
The so-called Islamic State . The territory ISIS controls . What a cruel irony that someone running for President would equate us with them .
Don't worry , some will say , as President , Trump will be surrounded by smart advisors who will rein in his worst impulses .
So when a tweet gets under his skin and he wants to retaliate with a cruise missile , maybe cooler heads will convince him not to .
Well , maybe . But look at who he 's put in charge of his campaign .
Trump likes to say he only hires the best people .
But he 's had to fire so many campaign managers it 's like an episode from the Apprentice .
And the latest shake-up was designed to quote
Let Trump be Trump . So to do that , he hired Stephen Bannon , the head of a right-wing website , called Breitbart.com, as campaign CEO .
Now to give you a flavor of his work , here are a few headlines they 've published .
And I 'm not making this up . Birth Control Makes Women Unattractive and Crazy .
Would You Rather Your Child Had Feminism or Cancer ?
Gabby Giffords : The Gun Control Movement 's Human Shield
Hoist It High And Proud : The Confederate Flag Proclaims A Glorious Heritage .
That one came shortly after the Charleston massacre , when Democrats and Republicans alike were doing everything they could to heal racial divides that Breitbart and Bannon tried to inflame .
Just imagine Donald Trump reading that and thinking : this is what I need more of in my campaign .
Now Bannon has nasty things to say about pretty much everyone .
This spring , he railed against Speaker Paul Ryan for , quote rubbing his social-justice Catholicism in my nose every second .
No wonder he 's gone to work for Trump the only Presidential candidate ever to get into a public feud with the Pope .
It 's truly hard to believe , but according to the Southern Poverty Law Center , which tracks hate groups , Breitbart embraces
ideas on the extremist fringe of the conservative right .
This is not conservatism as we have known it , this is not Republicanism as we have know it .
These are racist ideas . Race-baiting ideas . Anti-Muslim , anti-Immigrant , anti-women all key tenets making up an emerging racist ideology known as the Alt-Right . '
Now , Alt-Right is short for Alternative Right .
The Wall Street Journal describes it as a loose , but organized movement , mostly online , that rejects mainstream conservatism , promotes nationalism and views immigration and multiculturalism as threats to white identity .
So the de facto merger between Breitbart and the Trump Campaign represents a landmark achievement for this group .
A fringe element has effectively taken over the Republican Party .
This is part of a broader story the rising tide of hardline , right-wing nationalism around the world .
Just yesterday , one of Britain 's most prominent right-wing leaders , a man named , Nigel Farage , who stoked anti-immigrant sentiments to win the referendum to have Britain leave the European Union , campaigned with Donald Trump in Mississippi .
Farage has called for the bar of legal immigrants from public school and health services .
Has said women , and I quote , are worth less than men , and supports scrapping laws that prevent employers from discriminating based on race .
That 's who Donald Trump wants by his side when he is addressing an audience of American voters .
And the grand godfather of this global brand of extreme nationalism is Russian President Vladimir Putin .
In fact , Farage regularly appears on Russian propaganda programs .
Now he 's standing on the same stage as the Republican nominee .
Trump himself heaps praise on Putin and embraces pro-Russian policies .
He talks casually of abandoning our NATO allies , recognizing Russia 's annexation of Crimea , giving the Kremlin a free hand in Eastern Europe .
American Presidents from Truman , to Reagan , to Bush and Clinton , to Obama , have rejected the kind of approach Trump is taking on Russia .
And we should , too . All of this adds up to something we have never seen before .
Of course there 's always been a paranoid fringe in our politics , a lot of it rising from racial resentment .
But it 's never had the nominee of a major party stoking it , encouraging it , and giving it a national megaphone .
Until now . On David Duke 's radio show the other day , the mood was jubilant .
We appear to have taken over the Republican Party , one white supremacist said .
Duke laughed . No , there 's still more work to do , he replied .
So no one should have any illusions about what 's really going on here .
The names may have changed . Racists now call themselves racialists .
White supremacists now call themselves white nationalists .
The paranoid fringe now calls itself alt-right . But the hate burns just as bright .
And now Trump is trying to rebrand himself as well .
But don't be fooled . There 's an old Mexican proverb that says
Tell me with whom you walk , and I will tell you who you are .
But we know who Trump is . A few words on a teleprompter won't change that .
He says he wants to make America great again , but more and more it seems as though his real message seems to be Make America hate again .
And this isn't just about one election . It 's about who we are as a nation .
It 's about the kind of example we want to set for our children and grandchildren .
Next time you see Trump rant on television , think about all the children listening across America .
Kids hear a lot more than we think . Parents and teachers are already worrying about what they call the Trump Effect .
They report that bullying and harassment are on the rise in our schools , especially targeting students of color , Muslims , and immigrants .
At a recent high school basketball game in Indiana , white students held up Trump signs and taunted Latino players on the opposing team with chants of Build the wall ! and Speak English .
After a similar incident in Iowa , one frustrated school principal said , They see it in a presidential campaign and now it 's OK for everyone to say this .
We wouldn't tolerate this kind of behavior before and we wouldn't tolerate it in our own homes .
And we shouldn't stand for it in a presidential candidate .
My friends , this is a moment of reckoning for every Republican dismayed that the Party of Lincoln has become the Party of Trump .
It 's a moment of reckoning for all of us who love our country and believe that America is better than this .
Twenty years ago , when Bob Dole accepted the Republican nomination , he pointed to the exits in the convention hall and told any racists in the Party to get out .
The week after 9/11 , George W . Bush went to a mosque and declared for everyone to hear that Muslims love America just as much as I do .
In 2008 , John McCain told his own supporters that they were wrong about the man he was trying to defeat .
Senator McCain made sure they knew Barack Obama , he said , is an American citizen and a decent person .
We need that kind of leadership again . We can have our disagreements , and believe me , I understand that .
I think that 's healthy . We need good debates , but we need to do it in a respectful way , not finger pointing and blaming , and stirring up this bigotry and prejudice .
Every day , more Americans are standing up and saying enough is enough including a lot of Republicans .
And I am honored to have their support in this campaign .
And I promise you this : with your help , I will be a president for Democrats , Republicans , and Independents .
For those who vote for me and for those who vote against me .
I will be a president for all Americans . Because I truly believe we are stronger together .
This is a vision for the future rooted in our values and reflected in a rising generation of young people .
The young people in america today are the most open , diverse , and connected generation we have ever seen .
How many of you saw any of the Olympics ? Right ?
I was so proud , I always get so carried away whenever the Olympics are on .
And you look at the diversity of our athletes look at our fabulous Olympic team representing the United Stated of America .
Ibtihaj Muhammad , an African-American Muslim from New Jersey , won the bronze medal in fencing with grace and skill .
Would she even have a place in Donald Trump 's America ?
And I will tell you , when I was growing up , in so many parts of our country , Simone Manuel wouldn't have been allowed to swim in the same public pool as Katie Ledecky .
And now together on our swimming team they 're winning Olympic medals as teammates .
I don't know about you , but I don't think we have a person to waste .
We want to build an America where everyone has a place .
Where if you work hard and do your part you can get ahead and stay ahead .
That 's the basic bargain of America . And we cannot get to where we need to be , unless we move forward together and stand up against prejudice and paranoia .
And prove , again , that America is great because America is good .
Thank you all so very much , let 's go out and win the election .
God bless you and God bless the United States of America .
Good afternoon ! I am delighted to have this great honor of being here and having this opportunity to address you .
I want to thank the National Commander ; thank you Commander Barnett .
I want to thank Verna Jones , your Executive Director , and Dewey Moss , Aide to the National Commander .
And I want to thank a long time friend and advisor to me .
Someone who I am very grateful to , and that is your National Treasurer , George Buskirk .
Most of all , thanks to you . All the Legionnaires here and across America , most of all thanks to you .
Thanks for your service and our armed forces . You wore the uniform , you took an oath , you put your life on the line to protect the greatest country on Earth .
Yes . There are some who may argue with that , but not around me .
When you came home , you joined the American Legion , and by doing so , you kept serving .
Just look at what the Legion does . You care for wounded warriors , you help raise the next generation of American patriots .
I want to give a special shout out to Boys Nation , which meant so much to my husband when he was growing up .
And when I told him he was coming here today , he said , You 've got to mention Boys Nation .
I told him I would , but I also have to mention Girls Nation too .
I want to thank your auxiliary , the world 's largest women 's patriotic service organization . .
I was honored to receive the Auxiliary 's Public Spirit Award in 1997 , and I have great admiration for the work that you do .
As the daughter of a veteran , as a proud American , I am grateful to you all .
Now I 'm not going to talk a lot about politics today , but I do want to say this .
Whoever America elects this fall won't just be our next president ; that person will be our next Commander-in-Chief .
And every person in this room understands how great a responsibility that is .
Now I know some of you are Democrats , and some of you are Republicans and some of you are independents .
I suppose there are some of you who have never voted for a Democrat before .
I get that . My dad was a Rock-ribbed Republican , but I learned at our dinner table that we can disagree without being disagreeable .
And , I want you to know if I am fortunate enough to win this election , I will be a president for Democrats , Republicans , independents .
For people who vote for me , for people who don't .
For all Americans . That is what I think we need .
We need to unify our country and go forward into the future with confidence and optimism .
Today I want you to know a little bit about where I stand , and how I see the world and America 's place in it .
I spent four years as your Secretary of State . Eight years before that as senator of the great state of New York , six years on the Senate Armed Services Committee .
If there is one core belief that has guided and inspired me every step of the way , it is this : United States is an exceptional nation .
I believe we are still Lincoln 's last best hope of earth .
We are still Reagan 's shining city on a hill .
We 're still Robert Kennedy 's great , unselfish , compassionate country .
And it 's not just that we have the greatest military or that our economy is larger than any on earth .
It 's also the strength of our values . The strength of the American people .
Everyone who works harder , dreams bigger and never , ever stops trying to make our country and the world a better place .
And part of what makes an exceptional nation is that we are also an indispensable nation .
In fact , we are the indispensable nation . People all over the world look to us and follow our lead .
My friends , we are so lucky to be Americans .
It is an extraordinary blessing . It 's why so many people from so many places want to be Americans too .
But it 's also a serious responsibility . The decisions we make and the actions we take , even the actions we don't take , affect millions , even billions of lives .
You know that , you 've seen it . All this may seem evident , especially to men and women who have worn the uniform .
You may wonder how anyone could disagree . But in fact , my opponent in the race has said very clearly that he thinks American exceptionalism is insulting to the rest of the world .
In fact , when Vladimir Putin , of all people , criticized American exceptionalism , my opponent agreed with him saying , and I quote ,
If you are in Russia , you don't want to hear that America is exceptional .
Well maybe you don't want to hear it , but that doesn't mean it 's not true .
My opponent misses something important . When we say America is exceptional , it doesn't mean that people from other places don't feel deep national pride just like we do .
It means that we recognize America 's unique and unparalleled ability to be a force for peace and progress .
A champion for freedom and opportunity . Our power comes with a responsibility to lead .
Humbly , thoughtfully , and with a fierce commitment to our values .
Because when America fails to lead , we leave a vacuum .
It either causes chaos , or other countries or other networks rush in to fill the void .
So , no matter how hard it gets , no matter how great the challenge , America must lead .
The question is how we lead . What kind of ideas , strategies and tactics we bring to our leadership .
American leadership means standing with our allies . Because our network of allies is part of what makes us exceptional .
No other country in the world has alliances like ours .
Russia and China have nothing close . We stand with our allies because generations of American troops fought and died to secure those bonds and because they deliver for us everyday .
Our allies share intelligence on terrorists . They provide staging areas for our military so we can respond quickly to events on the other side of the world .
Other nations ' soldiers , sailors , airmen , and marines often fight side by side with ours .
Some of you may have served and fought alongside men and women from other countries .
You saw them in action . You know how important these bonds are to our security .
Threatening to walk away from our alliances , ignoring the importance that they still are to us is not only wrong ; it is dangerous .
If I 'm your president , our friends will always know America will have your back , and we expect you to have ours .
American leadership means bringing the world together to solve global problems , as only we can .
United States build the international coalition against ISIS . Now we are working with partners to take back territory and defeat them without getting drawn into a ground war .
We brought the world together to impose sanctions on Iran and secure a deal that puts a lid on Iran 's nuclear program without firing a single shot .
You don't build a coalition by insulting our friends or acting like a loose cannon .
You do it by putting in the slow , hard work of building relationships .
Getting countries working together was my job everyday as your Secretary of State .
It 's more than a photo op . It takes consistency and reliability .
Actually it 's just like building personal relationships . People have to get to know that they can count on you .
That you won't say one thing one day and something totally different the next .
And it certainly takes more than trying to make up for a year of insults and insinuations by dropping in on our neighbors for a few hours , then flying home again .
That 's not how it works . American leadership means leading with our values in pursuant of our interests in protection of our security .
At our best , the United States is the global force for freedom , justice and human dignity .
We celebrate our diversity as a source of national strength .
Just look at our armed forces , which represent all races , religions , ethnicities and yes , immigrants from other countries , all fighting for the red , white and blue .
We stand up to regimes that abuse human rights . We stand up for religious and ethnic minorities , for women , for people with disabilities .
And we comport ourselves with honor . There 's no greater proof of than what our Navy SEALs did during the raid to kill Osama bin Laden .
I was deeply honored to be a part of that small group advising the president .
I brought to those discussions my experience as a Senator from New York on 9/11 .
And my commitment to do whatever I could in whatever role I had to bring bin Laden to Justice .
You have all seen the picture of us crowded into the smaller Situation Room and watching the video screen .
Every second counted . One of the copters misgauged how high the wall was , around the courtyard clipped the tail getting disabled .
It did not stop the SEALs from rushing out , getting into the compound , returning fire against bin Laden 's bodyguards taking on his adult son and finally Bin Laden himself .
But the SEALs knew they had to destroy the helicopter before they left .
I was holding my breath through the entire operation . Because at any time , Pakistani soldiers could have arrived .
This compound was in a military garrison city actually the home of their military academy so yes , every second counted .
But still , our SEALs took the time to move to move the women and children , bin Laden 's family members , to safety , before destroying the helicopter .
That is what honor looks like . That is America at our best .
Maybe the soldiers of other nations wouldn't have bothered , or maybe they 'd have taken revenge on those family members of terrorists .
But that is not who we are . And anyone who doesn't understand that doesn't understand what makes our nation great .
And let me say something else about American greatness . There is no question we face real threats and real enemies that we need to confront and defeat .
But my opponent is wrong when he says America is no longer great .
Consider the record of the last eight years . In 2009 , our global economy was collapsing .
Osama bin Laden was plotting . We had more than 180,000 troops fighting two wars .
Iran was racing toward a nuclear weapon . Many of our allies were less supportive of American leadership than they had been in decades .
Look where are we now . We 've pulled the global economy out of free fall thanks to the hard work and sacrifice of the American people .
We 've re-deployed well over 100,000 troops from Iraq and Afghanistan so they can go home , rest and train for future contingencies .
We cut off Iran 's path to a nuclear weapon .
We convinced Russia to reduce their nuclear weapons arsenal . We protected our ally Israel , and we brought Osama bin Laden to justice .
We did that . We Americans did all that working together across party lines .
And there is no question we have more work to do , but let 's be clear : We are stronger together .
And it will be my goal if I am fortunate enough to be your president , to bring people back together again to set our goals and move forward to achieve them .
I know we can't cozy up to dictators . We have to stand up to them .
We can't contain ISIS ; we must defeat them , and we will .
We will do whatever is necessary for as long as it takes to bring them to justice and end their reign of terror , once and for all .
This election is about how to make things better . Now make no mistake , I believe we do have better days ahead .
But , things could also get worse . If more countries get nuclear weapons , if we abandon our allies .
If our Commander in Chief orders our military to break the laws and commit torture , or murder terrorists ' family members .
That 's why it is so critical that we get this right .
And let me underscore what I have said throughout this campaign : we must only send our troops into harm 's way as a last resort , not a first choice .
That must be our bedrock principle . But we must be able to act decisively on our own when we need to .
I completely reject anyone , including my opponent , who calls the American military and I quote ,
A disaster . That 's an insult to the men and women serving today and all who have served before who put their lives on the line every day .
And it 's just not true . We do have more work to do to continue to have the strongest , most effective military in the world .
I know this is something that matters a great deal to everyone in this room .
Here 's what we have to do we can't lose our military edge .
That means giving the Pentagon the stable , predictable funding it needs to make smart investments .
You 've heard of the sequester the arbitrary caps that Congress has imposed on our entire government for the past several years .
Now , look I 'm all for cutting the fat out of the budget and making sure we stretch our dollars and proud of the fact that when my husband left office we had a balance budget and a surplus .
And I hope that someday we can get back to doing that .
But we cannot impose arbitrary limits on something as important as our military .
That makes no sense at all . The sequester makes our country less secure .
Let 's end it and get a budget deal that supports America 's military , our families , and our country .
And let 's make reform a priority , so that the Defense Department spends its budget on the right things .
And by the way , the last thing we need is a president who brings more name-calling and temper tantrums to Washington .
We 've got to get people listening to each other again , getting both parties actually to work together .
Let 's modernize our army and marines , our Navy and Air Force , our Coast Guard .
We need to respond to evolving threats from states like Russia and China , Iran and North Korea .
From networks , criminal and terrorist networks like ISIS . We need a military that is ready and agile so it can meet the full range of threats and operate on short notice on every domain , not just land , sea , air , and space , but also cyber space .
We 'll invest in new technologies so new breakthroughs can transform our military , just as stealth , precision weapons , and advanced communications did in the past .
We 'll make a renewed push to reduce the world 's nuclear weapons , because that does make us all safer .
And we 'll step up our efforts to secure nuclear material around the world , and stop terrorists from acquiring or using weapons of mass destruction .
One of the first things I will do as president is to call for a new Nuclear Posture Review .
We have to make sure that America 's arsenal is prepared to meet future threats .
We 'll invest in the next frontier of military engagement protecting U.S. interests in outer
space and cyberspace . You 've seen reports Russia has hacked into a lot of things .
China has hacked into a lot of things . Russia even hacked into the Democratic National Committee , maybe even some state election systems .
So we have got to step up our game . Make sure we are well defended and able to take the fight to those who go after us .
As president I will make it clear that the United States will treat cyber attacks just like any other attack .
We will be ready with serious political , economic and military responses .
And we are going to invest in protecting our governmental networks and national infrastructure .
I want us to lead the world in setting the rules of cyberspace .
If America doesn't , others will . So in short , we have to be ready to win today 's fights and tomorrow 's .
But you know that the most important thing isn't the size of our military or the sophistication of our weapons .
The most important thing is our people . The men and women who put on the uniform and serve .
We need to we need to take a hard look at our military 's personal policies to make sure we are doing everything to attract and keep the best and the brightest who volunteer .
We need to support not only them , but also their families .
As President , I will never forget the debt we owe to our veterans and your families who also served .
I will never , ever disrespect Gold Star families who made who 've made the ultimate sacrifice for our nation , or prisoners of war who endured so much in our name .
To insult them is just so wrong , and it says a lot about the person doing the insulting .
In the Senate , I worked with Republicans to increase the benefit paid to Gold Star families , to expand access to military health insurance , to make sure all members of the
Guard and Reserves and their families have access to health benefits , whether they are deployed or training at home .
I fought successfully to amend the 2007 Defense Appropriations Act , to establish a training program for family caregivers helping loved ones with traumatic brain injuries .
Senator John McCain and I joined forces to personally raise money for a state of the art rehab facility at Brooke Army Medical in San Antonio to help seriously wounded service members coming home from Iraq and Afghanistan .
Like you I , I was outraged by the scandals at V.A. hospitals people waiting for months or years for wheelchairs and basic medications
some even dying while waiting for an appointment . I know that you heard from Secretary McDonald and I know how hard he and his team are working .
We 're going to build a 21st century Department of Veterans Affairs that delivers world-class care , and we are not going to let anyone privatize the V.A.
We 're going to reform and strengthen it , not privatize it .
We will ensure access to timely , quality care for all of our veterans , improve care for women who are often underserved , identify and treat all wounds of war , visible and invisible including Agent Orange , Gulf War Syndrome and traumatic brain injury and PTSD . We will end the epidemic of veterans suicides by expanding access to mental health care and fighting the stigma that isolates too many of our veterans from getting the care they need .
I feel passionately about this because I have looked into the eyes of too many family members who have lost their loved one to suicide .
That is why just two days ago when I released my plan of mental health services for all Americans , I included a specific section for more help about veterans and their families because we know too many are not getting the help they need right now .
We have got to serve them just as they have served us .
We 're going to help more veterans looking for jobs with expanded tax credits for businesses that hire veterans , more support to veterans who want to start their own businesses , and making it easier for veterans to get credit for the skills they learned while serving .
And we 're going to crack down on for-profit schools and companies that prey on or discriminate against service members , veterans or military families .
They should be ashamed of themselves , and we 're going to hold them accountable .
We will also work closely with the American Legion to clean up and expedite the appeals process .
Benefits should be delivered as quickly as possible and appeals should be decided as expeditiously as possible .
I thank you for the work you are doing on that .
Now , a lot of what I 've mentioned today has support from both Democrats and Republicans .
Maintaining our military and caring for our veterans should never be partisan issues .
Defending American exceptionalism should always be above politics . But this is not a normal election .
The debates are not the normal disagreements between Republicans and Democrats .
So I hope you will listen carefully to what my opponent and I propose .
Consider our plans and the values behind them . And after you 've given us both a fair hearing , I hope you will join the growing number of Americans
Democrats , Republicans and independents who are supporting our vision for the kind of future we want for our country .
This election shouldn't be about ideology . It 's not just about differences over policy .
It truly is about who has the experience and the temperament to serve as president and Commander in Chief .
Just three weeks ago , 50 Republican national security experts , who served in prior Republican administrations , wrote a letter saying that they will not vote for Donald Trump , because he would be in their words
the most reckless President in American history . By contrast , I am deeply honored to have so many retired military leaders backing me , along with these Republican experts .
I 'm supported by people on both sides of the aisle and both sides of the debates that have defined our foreign policy for the last 30 years .
They know I believe in a bipartisan foreign policy ; they know I believe we should be finding ways to bring our country together around national security , our role in the world , our values .
They know they can count on me to do that , and what matters to them is that we make the right choice in November .
The stakes this fall are as high as any election in our lifetimes .
So I 'm going to keep raising these issues , keep telling people where I stand , laying out plans for what I do if I 'm elected .
I have to tell you , it is a little bit funny to me .
I get criticized for having so many plans . People say ,
Oh , there she goes with another plan about mental health , about veterans .
Well , I have this old-fashion idea ; if I 'm asking for your vote for president , I should tell you what I want to do as your president .
So yes , I have laid out plans , and I 'm going to work my heart out to implement those plans , and if I win this fall , no one will work harder for our troops , our veterans and our military families .
This is personal to me , starting with my dad .
His name was Hugh Rodham . He enlisted in the Navy shortly after Pearl Harbor .
He became a chief petty officer at Great Lakes , north of Chicago , responsible for training thousands of young sailors before they shipped out to sea , mostly to the Pacific Theater .
After my dad died , I received letters from men who had served under him .
I treasure them to this day . My father told me how emotional he got when he accompanied his trainees to the West Coast and saw those young sailors get on board their ships .
He knew some of them wouldn't survive . But he believed in their cause .
He believed in them . And they went to serve , to protect our country .
They knew their country needed them . Over the course of the last years , I 've also had the privilege of working with , helping and supporting so many active duty and retired military members and families , first as First Lady , then as senator , then as Secretary of State .
Whenever I would go anywhere representing you and be privileged to meet with the men and women who serve our country , I would sit down , if we had a chance , and hear what was on their minds , shake hands and take pictures , sometimes bring messages back to their loved ones .
And I too knew that some of those young men and women wouldn't be coming home either .
It 's that kind of courage and honor that our men and women in uniform demonstrate every single day .
I will never forget that , and I would expect the American Legion to be my partner in the White House to make sure I never do .
You and all our veterans deserve nothing less our respect , our thanks , but you also deserve a country that honors your service , not just with words but with deeds .
That 's why the American Legion is so critical , working everyday to make sure America lives up to that standard .
I will be doing that work right along beside you if I am given the great honor to serve as your president and Commander-in-Chief .
Thank you all . God bless you . And God bless the United States of America .
Hello ! Whoa , it is so great to be here .
Thank you all so much . And I was backstage listening to Jordan Polk 's story , and it was just so powerful and moving , and her ability to stand up here , talk about her personal family experience , coming out of Katrina , staying strong , moving forward , being a student here at Johnson C . Smith University .
I am so excited . I want to thank her and I want to thank Dr. Carter .
Thank you for welcoming us here . You have welcomed two Clintons in the last year .
There 's something about this place that has attracted both my husband and myself .
I apologize for being late . We had a disabled airplane on the runway that had to get moved .
It took a lot longer than expected . But I 've been looking forward to joining all of you here in Charlotte .
I want to recognize and thank your mayor , Mayor Jennifer Roberts .
There you are . Thank you , Mayor Roberts . I want to thank Trevor Fuller , chair of the Mecklenburg County Commission .
I want to acknowledge Josh Stein , candidate for attorney general .
And to all of you gathered here today . It is 61 days until the election .
And I think it 's so appropriate to be here in the great state of North Carolina
at a really well-renowned H you know what I 'm saying ?
HBCU , historically black college and university . That , like so many others , has played such an important role in our country 's history , producing some of America 's finest leaders .
And I am very proud . I was just doing a phone call on the way here with a lot of my young organizers on college campuses across our country , and I got a question from a young woman at another historical black college and university Fayetteville .
And I told her that I have a plan to help all of you afford to go to college .
I have a plan to help all of you with student debt to pay it down and pay it off .
And I have a special plan of a $25 billion fund specifically aimed at supporting HBCUs .
Because we need a lot of opportunities for young people from everywhere .
It shouldn't matter what you look like , where you 're from , or who you love .
You deserve to be in college if that is your choice .
So right now we 're up and running , we 're organizing across America , and as Jordan said , this election has such high stakes , but the highest stakes are for young people .
Young people across America . This election is going to determine in so many ways what kind of futures you will have .
I don't say that lightly . Everybody always says every election is important , and I happen to believe that .
I think it 's one of the great gifts of our democracy that we have the opportunity to choose our leaders .
And people brave people going back for so many years have fought to preserve that right .
And that right is under attack right now , and it is under attack in North Carolina , of all places , a state that often set the standard for moving everybody into the future , and I admired that so much emphasis on education from literally preschool through college ; emphasis on research ; emphasis on job creation and innovation .
And now North Carolina , under the current governor and legislature , has been trying to restrict people 's right to vote .
Well , you know it . North Carolina voters , though , won an important victory when a federal court just struck down this state 's voter ID law .
And the federal court brought back more days of what 's called one-stop early voting .
And here 's what the court said this is not me talking .
This is what the federal court said . The court said the North Carolina law was designed to target African American with almost surgical precision .
Now , that 's not just happening in North Carolina , unfortunately .
It 's happening across America . And courts have been overturning restrictions that make it harder not just for African Americans but low-income people , Latinos , young people .
One of the provisions in the North Carolina law was to make it really hard to vote where you go to school .
So this has been a concerted effort to undermine the right to vote , even to make it hard for people with disabilities to cast ballots .
Well , what 's the best way to repudiate that kind of underhanded , mean-spirited effort to deprive people of their votes ?
Get out and vote and make it clear we 're not putting up with that .
These laws are a blast from the Jim Crow past , and they have no place in 21st century America .
We should be doing everything we can to make it easier to vote , not harder .
That 's why if I 'm elected president , I will work to expand early voting .
We will enact universal voter registration so every young person in every state is automatically registered to vote when you turn 18 .
And we will repair the damage done to the Voting Rights Act and take on discrimination in all forms .
Now , HB2 is another example of trying discriminate against people that doesn't have any place in our modern society .
You 've seen this firsthand in North Carolina . Discrimination is not only wrong , it 's bad for business .
The NBA , you know , cancelled the game . PayPal cancelled bringing , I think , 400 jobs .
Others are not coming to this beautiful state because they don't want to be associated with the discriminatory , bigoted policies of your governor and legislature .
Now , one thing you can do about that is change your governor in November .
And while you 're at it , change one of your Senators .
We 're going to need reinforcements up in Washington . We got a big agenda .
And people say to me , well , what is it you 're going to try to get done ?
Well , I 'll show you real easy . We just published a book .
Right ? Tim Kaine and I put this book out .
It 's called Stronger Together . It 's not very long .
Not a hard read . But we have this old-fashioned idea that if we 're asking you to support us for president , we ought to tell you what we 're going to do .
Not just bluster . Not just empty words . Not just demagogic rhetoric .
Real plans that will improve your lives , make our country safer and better .
So you could pick this up . We 're going to build an economy that works for everybody , not just those at the top .
Sounds like a good idea . We 're going to make the biggest investment in good-paying jobs since World War II infrastructure , advanced manufacturing , clean energy jobs .
We 're going to make the economy fairer , raise the national minimum wage , get people who work full-time out of poverty .
And we are finally going to guarantee equal pay for women 's work .
It is long overdue . Did any of you see any of the Democratic convention ?
Well , I don't know . You might have missed one of my favorite sets of speakers .
We had these two young people from Kansas , 17 years old , young man , young woman .
I 'd read this , and I said , let 's contact these young people and find out their story .
Here 's their story . Seventeen . Had the same summer job .
Knew each other , working in a pizza restaurant . And they were pretty excited .
I remember when I got my first real job , not babysitting but actually showing up at a job and having to do it .
And so one day , after they finished work , they were talking , and the young woman said , I think , making $8 an hour , I should be able to at least save something for college .
And the young man , a friend of hers , said ,
Well , I 'm making $8.15 an hour . And she said ,
Well , why are you making 15 cents more an hour than I am ?
Neither of us had any experience to do this job .
We 're the same age . He said ,
Well , I don't know . That doesn't sound right .
Maybe there was a mistake . So they go to the manager .
They tell the manager . And the manager fired them both .
And you know what ? That 's legal . If you find out you 're not being paid the same for doing the same job , you can be fired .
So this is not some made-up problem . And this would raise family incomes .
And if you have a mother , a wife , a daughter , or a sister who 's working , it 's your issue .
So we 're going to get that done as well .
And like I said , we 're going to make college affordable for everybody , pay down debt .
But we 're going to do something else . I think it was a mistake when we got rid of all vocational education in high school .
It needed to be improved , don't get me wrong .
It wasn't training people for the jobs that were out in the marketplace any more .
But we got rid of all of it . We need technical education in high school .
We need more apprenticeship programs where young people can learn and earn at the same time .
And we 're going to go back to emphasizing that in high school , community colleges , apprenticeship programs , creative ideas like coding camps .
We 're going to have 1.4 million jobs in 2020 for people who have computer science skills , and we 're going to only , if we continue on our present path , only have 400,000 Americans prepared to do those jobs .
I want those jobs to be American jobs . So we 're going to help train people of all ages to be able to do those jobs .
We are also going to defend quality affordable health care for everybody , but we 're going to get the costs down .
We 're going to get the costs of prescription drugs down for sure .
And we 're going to emphasize two things that we have fallen short on , mental health and addiction services .
People I 've met here in North Carolina and across America talk to me about that all the time .
So again , we 've got our ideas in here .
We want you to engage with us , give us your ideas .
This needs to be an ongoing conversation . We want you to hold us accountable when we 're in that White House trying to do all of this .
But we also have to keep America safe . And we have to lead the world with steadiness and strength .
One of the biggest differences in this campaign is Donald Trump basically says , I alone can fix it , we have it is .
Think of who that leaves out . That leaves out our troops on the front line .
It leaves out our police and fire responders to emergencies .
It leaves out our teachers , our educators who are working to help young people .
It leaves out everybody . I alone can fix it ?
I was raised to believe that we 're in this together , and together we can fix it .
And that is exactly what we 're going to do .
That 's why Tim Kaine and I are running a campaign of issues , not insults .
Donald Trump has a different approach . He wants to build an economy that works even better for himself , starting with a $4 billion tax cut for his own family .
He 's built a career on stiffing workers , mom and pop contractors , small businesses that did jobs for him and the he refused to pay them .
I take this very personally . My father was a small businessman .
That 's how he provided a good middle class living for us .
He printed drapery fabrics . He would get the fabric and roll it out on these big long tables , and you 'd take a silkscreen and you 'd put it down .
You 'd dump the paint in . You 'd take the squeegee .
You 'd go across . You 'd lift it up .
You 'd go down to the end of one table , start on the other end of the other table .
And you 'd do it until the job was done .
Sometimes I was there helping him . And then he would load the fabric into his car and he would deliver it .
I tell you what , I am so grateful he never had a contract with Donald Trump 's businesses .
In fact , I just ran across a story in Las Vegas when I was there a few weeks ago of a small drapery business who got what they thought was the greatest contract ever for Trump 's new hotel in Las Vegas .
They delivered the goods , and they were refused payment , for no reason other than it 's a game to him .
Everything is a game . It 's like he 's living in his own celebrity reality TV program .
You know what , Donald ? This is real reality .
This is real people . This is real decisions that have to be made for our country .
He actually stood on a debate stage and said wages are too high in America .
Now , he 's got some new advisors . He 's had a bunch of advisors .
He 's got some new advisors . And they 're all trying to make him look more presidential .
Sound more serious . It 's not working too well .
But remember what Maya Angelou , who spent the last years of her life right here in this state at Wake Forest , reminded all of us .
I think about it often . I was so privileged to know her .
When someone shows you who they are , believe them the first time .
You know , stronger together also means working with our true allies and partners around the world , and last night I offered some thought about ISIS , Iran , how we 're going to reform the VA system to take better care of our vets .
And just since last night , when I appeared on that program back-to-back with Trump , just in the last 24 hours , more retired generals and admirals have signed up to support my campaign .
People who have sacrificed and spent their lives protecting our country , valuing what makes us exceptional and already great , see Donald Trump and know he should not be anywhere near the White House .
He is temperamentally unfit to be president and commander-in-chief . Now , tomorrow I will hold a meeting of bipartisan , bipartisan which is what I want to get us back to where Republicans and Democrats work together to make the changes to protect our country .
I 'm going to be meeting with a bipartisan group of leaders and experts to focus more on these crucial challenges , but it 's hard to forget what Trump did last night .
It was a test and he failed it . He trash-talked about America 's generals saying that they 've been quote reduced to rubble .
He suggested he would fire them all and hand-pick his own generals since he knows so much about what it takes to be a general .
He attacked dozens of former flag officers . At the same time , and here 's what I want you to really hear , because even I was shocked by this and I didn't know much could shock me coming out of his mouth anymore , he praised Russia 's strongman Vladimir Putin , even taking the astonishing step of suggesting he prefers the Russian president to our American president .
That is not just unpatriotic , it 's not just insulting to the office and the man who holds the office , it is scary ; it is dangerous .
It actually suggests he will let Putin do what Putin wants and even make excuses for him .
I said this morning I was trying to think about
what other presidents would be imagining hearing that coming out of the nominee for the Republican Party .
What would Ronald Reagan say about a Republican nominee who attacks America 's generals and heaps praise on Russia 's president ?
We 've never seen anything like this . And one thing you didn't hear from him was any plan to take on ISIS , one of the biggest threats facing our country .
He says his plan is still a secret . Well , the truth is he doesn't have a plan .
I served on the Senate Armed Services Committee . I served as Secretary of State as you know .
I respect the men and women who put their lives on the line for the country that I love and that I believe in .
So whether you 're passionate about more good jobs , better education , healthcare , whether you 're passionate about protecting our country and the brave men and women who serve us , you have to realize , as so many Republicans are , that this is a time to put country over party .
I would be saying that even if I were not running against him .
We have never been threatened as much by a single candidate running for president as we have been in this election .
As your commander-in-chief , I will not trash our country 's most cherished values , I will defend them .
And that is especially on my mind because this weekend is the 15th anniversary of 9/11 .
I was a senator serving , and I will never forget the horror of that day or the bravery of our first responders , the victims , the survivors , people I had the honor to work with and represent .
It 's what kept me really so passionately involved on behalf of the people that I served all during those years .
And that is what I was thinking of 10 years later in the White House Situation Room .
I was part of the small group advising President Obama whether or not the intelligence we had was good enough to take a chance to go deep into Pakistan to try to finally bring Osama bin Laden to justice .
It was not an easy choice by any means . These never are .
That 's why who sits at the head of that table in the Situation Room has to be able to sort out fact from opinion , has to be able to ask the hard questions , pursue even the most difficult leads .
We went through that hour after hour after hour . And then the President went around the table asking each of us what we advised , and we were split because it was not some kind of easy layup .
I believed it was strong enough that we needed to take action , and I supported taking action that would determine whether or not we were successful .
That meant sending in Special Forces . Now , you know what happened .
I was in that Situation Room watching that day the most stressful 30 minutes of my life probably because you remember one of the helicopters hit its tail on the wall going into the courtyard and became disabled .
That meant thank goodness there were good contingency plans , but you had to get another helicopter in to take out the SEALs who would no longer be able to fly out on that one .
But here 's what I want to tell you because it is a story that to me illustrates our values in such a clear , unambiguous way .
You 've heard Donald Trump say he would order our troops to torture .
You 've heard him say he would order our troops to kill family members of terrorists .
You would know that he was advocating illegal actions against our own laws as well as the laws of war .
Thank goodness there 's a code of honor in our military stronger than the bluster and the bullying of Donald Trump because here is what happened on that night .
Every single second counted . That helicopter had to be blown up , but before it was and remember the SEALs had gone in , they had taken out the two Kuwaitis , the bodyguards , they 'd taken out bin Laden 's son who was there , and they took out bin Laden .
They had to get his body out . They had to get themselves out , but here 's what they did first .
They rounded up all the women and children , members of terrorist families , they took them outside as far from the helicopter as they could get them in order that they would not be hurt .
That , Donald Trump , is what American honor looks like , and that is what we 're going to stand up and defend in the face of your outrageous , disgraceful attacks on the men and women of our armed forces .
We 're going to unify this country , my friends .
We are going to bring us back together . We are going to get things done , big things .
That 's who we are as Americans . I can't do any of this unless you join me in this campaign .
You can start by going to HillaryClinton.com or texting join ,
j-o-i-n , to 47246 . You can knock on doors .
You can make phone calls . Register your friends to vote .
Attend a house party in your neighborhood . We 're going to keep asking for your help over these next two months .
There is so much at stake in North Carolina and in America .
No one can sit on the sidelines . The stakes are high for everyone .
Join the campaign . Let 's build a future where we 're stronger together .
Thank you . Good evening . This is the day the Lord has made ; let us rejoice and be glad in it .
President Young , pastors , friends , I 'm very grateful for this great chance to be with you during your week of convention .
I 'm especially pleased to see my friend , the mayor of this great city .
He is someone who , if you haven't gotten to know , I hope you do .
Thank you , Mayor Sly James . I was also delighted to greet , on the way in , the new Jackson County executive , Major League baseball star and all-around good guy Frank White , who has done such an incredible amount of good work on the field and now off the field .
I want to thank all of you Dr. Miles , Dr. Brown , all our friends from this city and this state , for hosting us .
I want to acknowledge on a personal point Dr. Shaw , celebrating 60 years as pastor of the White Rock Baptist Church .
When I saw him tonight , I kidded him and said he started when he was 2 .
I 'm sure there 's a law against that , Dr. Shaw .
Dr. McKinney , Dr. Brown , all the members of the executive board , and state presidents .
Now , I know that Reverend Jackson was with you on Monday , and Congressman Cleaver was with you on Tuesday .
So talk about two tough acts to follow . But they are both dear , longstanding friends of mine .
And I am honored to be on this same stage as so many distinguished leaders .
Now , I happen to be a born and raised Methodist , but I 've been married to a Southern Baptist for more than 40 years .
And from Arkansas to New York friends , from Arkansas .
John , they 've got friends from Arkansas here but across this great country , you 've welcomed me into your congregations with open arms and open hearts .
And I am grateful for the friendship , support , and Christian hospitality I have found there .
As pastors , as spouses of pastors , families of pastors , you know better than anyone the importance of building relationships of trust and respect .
And I am sure some of you are sick and tired of politicians who think they can just show up at election time , say a few nice words , and then earn your support .
Right ? Well , you and your congregations deserve better than that .
You deserve a sustained commitment to expanding opportunity , equity , and justice , not just for two or four years , not just when the cameras are on and people are watching , but every single day .
And you know better than anyone that people who look at the African American community and see only poverty , crime , and despair are missing so much .
They 're missing the vibrancy of black-owned businesses , the excellence of historically black colleges and universities .
They 're missing the success of black leaders in every field , and the passion of a new generation of young black activists .
And yes , they are missing the strength of the black church , the solid rock on which so much is built .
Well , I see you . I see the work you do and the lives you change .
And today I want to say something that you don't hear often enough : Thank you .
Thank you . Thank you for answering the charge given to us by Jesus , as Matthew records , to feed the hungry , clothe the naked , visit the sick , welcome the stranger .
Thank you for loving all people , especially the least , the last , and the lost among us .
And you know so well we 're not asked to love each other , not urged or requested .
We are commanded to love . Indeed , Jesus made it his greatest commandment .
When I used to teach the occasional Sunday School class , I often taught on that lesson .
That 's a hard commandment to obey . Some days it 's really hard for me .
But in so many ways , all of you have answered that call .
I 've been privileged to see your love in action with my own eyes .
I 've seen the love at Mount Zion Missionary Baptist Church in Cedar Rapids , Iowa .
Pastor Damian Epps and his congregation collected tens of thousands of water bottles to send to families in Flint , Michigan suffering from water poisoned with lead .
Because they remembered that eight years before , when the Mississippi River rose up and flooded Eastern Iowa , others came to their aid .
As Pastor Epps said , they are fellow Americans . They are human beings .
We should want to reach out and help . And he 's right .
That ethic is at the core of our Christian faith .
And we all have work together to make sure every child in America has clean water to drink , clean air to breathe , and good schools , no matter what zip code they live in .
I 've seen the love at Tabernacle Community Baptist Church in Milwaukee .
Reverend Don Darius Butler has helped organize gun buy-back programs because none of us can sit back while the epidemic of gun violence ravages our communities and our country .
It is , as you know , by far the leading cause of death for young black men , more than the next nine causes of death combined .
And I promise you this : As president , I 'll stand with you in the fight for common-sense gun safety reforms .
I 've seen the love at the Triumph Baptist Church in Philadelphia where Reverend James Hall , guided by what he calls the three E 's of evangelism , education , and economic development , has been led to set up a credit union to help people in the community overlooked or ignored by the banks so they can get a small business loan , save for college , or put something away for retirement .
They 've helped build a supermarket in a neighborhood that hadn't seen one in more than 10 years .
And they 're reaching out beyond the pews to help families live safe , healthy , prosperous lives .
I 've seen the love at Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church in Montgomery , Alabama .
It was an honor to join Reverend Cromwell Handy and his congregation last December to celebrate the 60th anniversary of Rosa Parks ' courageous action against segregation .
And by the way , Rosa Parks may have opened up every seat on the bus ; now it 's our job to create good jobs so everyone can afford the fare and they can actually get bus routes to reach every neighborhood that connects them with safe , affordable housing and good jobs .
As president , I will be your partner in this work of translating love into action .
Together we 'll make transformative investments in communities that have been left out and left behind for far too long from our neglected inner cities to struggling rural communities .
We 'll work with both parties to make the biggest investment in good new jobs since World War II , including $20 billion to tackle the challenge of youth unemployment , which is twice as high for young African Americans as it is for young white Americans .
We 'll ban the box , and do more to help people who 've paid their debt to society find jobs and housing when they get out .
And we will embrace Congressman Jim Clyburn 's 10-20-30 plan steering 10 percent of federal investments to neighborhoods where 20 percent of the population has been living below the poverty line for 30 years .
That 's a great idea whose time has come , and we can translate it into reality .
Together , we 'll face head-on systemic racism and work to reform our criminal justice system from end-to-end .
Because everyone in every community should have respect for the law and be respected by the law .
We 'll beat back the assault on voting rights . It is a blast from the Jim Crow past that must be stopped .
We should be expanding voting rights instead . The best way to stand up to those who are trying to prevent any person from exercising his or her vote is to register and show up and vote against them and make sure your vote counts loudly and clearly .
There 's so much we can do if we keep love in our hearts as we do the noble work of breaking down barriers that hold Americans back .
Now , as you well know , we 're in the final stretch of an election that may be the most consequential of our lifetimes
an election in which all of these issues and so many more are at stake .
Our nation 's values are being questioned in this election .
We are facing a candidate with a long history of racial discrimination in his business
who traffics in toxic conspiracy theories like the lie that President Obama is not a true American .
If he doesn't even respect all Americans , how can he serve all Americans ?
So we must keep calling him out and rejecting the hateful , bigoted rhetoric that seeks to pit Americans one against each other , and continue making the case in every way for our vision of an America that is stronger together .
An America where all our children have the choice to live up to their God-given potential , no matter where they come from , or what they look like , or what the circumstances of their lives have been .
I have laid out my vision and my agenda . In fact , Senator Kaine and I have just published a book called
Stronger Together that lays it out clearly so you know what you 're voting for , not just against .
And we 're going to get the economy to work for everyone , not just those at the top ; how we 're going to have more jobs and infrastructure , advanced manufacturing , clean renewable energy ; how we 're going to do more to help small businesses .
The fastest-growing segment of small business in America today are small businesses started by African American women .
I want to be a small business president to help everyone willing to take the chance .
And we 're going to make the economy fairer . We are going to raise the national minimum wage .
No one who works full time should be mired in poverty at the end of a long , hard year .
And yes , we are finally going to guarantee equal pay for women 's work so that we raise family incomes and provide the respect that comes from being paid what you are entitled to earn .
And we 're going to make education work for every child
early childhood education , universal prekindergarten . I want to bring technical education back into high school .
It was a mistake when we took all of that vocational education out of our high schools .
I want every young person who wants to go to college to be able to go to college , but I want every young person who wants to do a good day 's work in a job that builds America the machinists , the tool and die makers , the computer coders
I want them to feel they are just as welcome and wanted .
And we 're going to make college affordable for everybody .
And I have a $25 billion plan specifically focused on historically black colleges and universities that served our nation and provide the leaders of the next generation .
And we 're going to help you pay down your student debt .
It is way past time . And let 's make sure health care is free
is available , affordable , of high quality for everybody .
And we 've got to get the cost of prescription drugs down and we have to do more to help with mental health and addiction , two problems I hear about across our country , which I know you hear about in your churches .
So we have a lot of work to do , and we 're going to keep working to earn every vote and never take any community or any person for granted .
Tim Kaine and I have launched a nationwide drive to register and commit 3 million Americans to vote by Election Day , and I hope you will be part of it .
This election is too important for anyone to sit on the sidelines .
Today , for a few minutes , I want to leave aside the politics and do something that doesn't always come naturally to a Midwestern Methodist ; that is , to talk about my own faith , how it led me to a life of service , how it will guide me as president .
Sometimes people ask me , Are you a praying person ?
And I tell me if I wasn't one before whoo , one week living in the White House or on the campaign trail would have turned me into a praying person .
But I had the great blessing to be raised by a family and a church that instilled in me a deep and abiding Christian faith and practice .
I still remember my late father a gruff former Navy man on his knees praying by his bed every night .
That made a big impression on me as a young girl , seeing him humble himself before God .
My mother taught Sunday school in our church , partly she said because she wanted to make sure that my brothers actually showed up at Sunday school when they walked out the door .
Her faith was rooted in gratitude for the love that helped her survive a painful childhood after her own family abandoned and mistreated her .
She was sustained by the kindness of others , like the first grade teacher who saw she had nothing to eat at lunch and brought extra food to share .
My mother was determined to pay that kindness forward . And she really liked the Wesleyan credo of our church ,
Do all the good you can for all the people you can in all the ways you can , as long as ever you can .
I was also so blessed to have a remarkable youth minister who believed , like John Wesley , the founder of Methodism , that the world is my parish .
He told us these young white kids in a suburban area of Chicago
you can't just be satisfied in your own church , in your own middle-class life ; we 're going into the inner city of Chicago , we 're going into church basements for fellowship with young people your age from African American churches and Hispanic churches .
That was the first time I was in a black church , when I was a teenager .
He took us to hear Dr. Martin Luther King , Jr. , speak .
He sent home the permission slips whether we could get in the church van to go into Chicago on a Sunday night to hear Dr. King , and some of the parents wouldn't let their kids go .
My mother said this is a historic opportunity . I remember , remember hearing Dr. King preach one of those well-known sermons , staying awake during the revolution , and then I stood in line with everybody in that big hall just to shake his hand and look into his eye .
His words , the power of his example , affected me deeply and added to the lessons of my minister to face the world as it is , not as we might want it to be , but to commit ourselves to turning it into what it should be .
So thanks to my family and my church , I embraced an activist social justice faith , a roll-up-your-sleeves and get-your-hands-dirty faith .
As St. Francis of Assisi reportedly advised , Try to preach the gospel always , and if necessary use words .
The scripture tells us that faith without works is dead .
The Epistle of James tells us we cannot just be hearers of the Word , we must be doers .
And I believe that with all my heart . I am grateful for the gift of personal salvation and for the great obligation of a social gospel .
To use the gift of grace wisely , to reflect the love of God and follow the example of Jesus Christ to the greater good of God 's beloved community .
That 's what led me to devote my life in the ways that I could to serving others , especially children .
I went to work right out of law school for the great Marian Wright Edelman the daughter of a Baptist minister from Bennettsville , South Carolina , and the founder of the Children 's Defense Fund .
She sent me door to door in New Bedford , Massachusetts on behalf of children with disabilities who weren't able at that time to attend public school , to South Carolina to investigate the plight of 12 and 13-year-old boys imprisoned alongside grown men who had committed serious felonies , and to Alabama to expose the racism of segregated academies .
I went undercover to Alabama all by myself . Marian just said ,
Well , you just have to go do it .
And I did . Now , it would have been easier and certainly more remunerative to follow many of my law school classmates to a high-powered New York law firm , but the call to service rooted in my faith was just too powerful .
For me , it has always been about trying to live up to the responsibility described by the Prophet Micah that we do justice , love kindness , and walk humbly with our God .
Humility is not something you hear much about in politics , is it ?
But we should . None of us is perfect . St. Paul reminds us we all see through a glass darkly and for now only know in part .
It 's because of that , because of the limitations we all face , that faith requires a leap , the conviction of things unseen .
It 's because of our limitations and imperfections that we must reach out beyond ourselves , to God and to each other .
It isn't easy , but I have learned to be grateful not just for my blessings but also for my faults and there are plenty !
I 've made my share of mistakes . I don't know anyone who hasn't .
Everyone here today has stumbled on their own stony paths .
It 's grace that lifts us up , and grace that leads us home .
But it 's also our job to learn from our mistakes ; to do all we can to do better next time , and to stay grateful .
To live by the discipline of gratitude . Our Christian faith is a journey that never ends .
It 's a constant challenge to live up to our own hopes and ideals .
To love and forgive others as we want to be loved and forgiven ourselves .
You know , as President Obama reminded us , seeking high office is , by definition , an act of audacity .
And yet , our greatest leaders are often the most humble .
Because they recognize both the awesome responsibilities of power and the frailties of human action .
I 've sat in the Situation Room with President Obama , weighing conflicting advice and imperfect information , wrestling with the hardest choices a leader can make : whether to send our young men and women into harm 's way , knowing that some of them will never return .
There 's nothing more humbling than that . Nothing that should drive you to your knees more than that .
That 's why in this time of both peril and promise , we need a President who understands that none of us has all the answers and no one person can fix our problems alone .
A President who understands we have to look out for each other and lift each other up , not tear each other down .
That 's what we need to do together : invest in our people , believe in each other , create the jobs and the schools and the opportunities for young people , so that they believe that we care about them .
Send our children to schools that reflect their promise , not our neglect .
Make sure every child is given the healthcare he or she needs , whether it is for an ailment of the body or the mind .
Stand ready to lift each other up when we fall , as we will .
Give those who have made mistakes a second , third chance .
Our faith is a faith of second and third and fourth and fifth chances for those who genuinely are seeking redemption .
And we need a President who understands the powerful role that faith and communities of faith have always played in moving our country toward justice , from the abolitionists of the 19th century , to the civil rights movement of the 20th century , to the unfinished business of today .
A President who will pray with you , and for you , who will defend the dignity of every individual , and the principle of religious freedom that was woven into the moral fabric of our nation from the very beginning .
Yes , we need a President who will do justice , love kindness , and walk humbly with our God .
My friends , one of the greatest privileges of this campaign has been getting to know a remarkable group of women who 've lost children to gun violence or police incidents .
They 're known as the Mothers of the Movement , and their hearts may be broken , but their souls shine thorough .
I 'll never forget listening to Gwen Carr , the mother of Eric Garner , describe the mission these mothers feel called to lead .
We were at the Central Baptist Church in Columbia , South Carolina , pastored by Reverend Ricky Ray Ezell , Sr.
I wish you all could have heard her Gwen was as eloquent as any preacher .
She recalled the pain of losing her son . She said , at first , she couldn't even get out of bed .
But then , she said , The Lord talked to me , and told me ,
Are you going to lay here and die like your son , or are you going to get up and uplift his name ? '
She realized in that moment that none of us can rest as long as there are others out there to be saved .
And that her voice could move people to action . And then the said this : I had to turn my sorrow into a strategy , my mourning into a movement ,
Gwen hasn't stopped working since , bringing more and more allies to the cause of peace and justice .
Because she knows , in a way , that tragedy and profound loss can teach us that we are stronger together than we could ever be alone .
Gwen and the other Mothers of the Movement are living what the Scripture tells us : Let us not grow weary in doing good , for in due season , we shall reap , if we do not lose heart .
Those are words we all should live by . And if I have the great honor of serving as your President , these are words that I will lead by .
Thank you all and may God bless you . Hello !
Hello , CHCI ! It is so great to be back here with so many friends and to see so many young people here because that fits the theme this year : educate , engage , vote .
And I can't think of better marching orders for the next 54 days .
[ Cheers . ] And anyone who just heard the congresswoman knows we cannot be on the sidelines .
This is the most consequential election in our lifetimes . I want to recognize the Institute for all you do to inspire the next generation of Latino leaders .
Last year , I had the chance to spend time with some of the CHCI interns and fellows .
It really was like seeing the future of America in one room .
I can't wait to see everything that they achieve . And I can't wait , if I 'm fortunate enough to be president , to put some of them to work !
And I want to thank all my friends in the Congressional Hispanic Caucus .
You fight every single day to lift up the Latino community when the cameras are rolling and when the cameras are off , at home in your districts and here in Washington .
And no one understands better than you the pivotal moment we 're at right now not just for Latinos but for our country .
My friends in the caucus have traveled to every battleground state , registered voters .
You 've stayed focused no matter what kind of outlandish and offensive comments we have heard from my opponent and his supporters .
By the way , I personally think a taco truck on every corner sounds absolutely delicious .
Now , here 's a confession : Running for president is never easy , but it shouldn't be , right ?
But tonight I have the ultimate challenge : speaking after President Obama .
He 's always a tough act to follow , in more ways than one .
I , for one , don't think the President gets the credit he deserves for rescuing our economy from another Great Depression .
Think of what we 've achieved these last eight years .
American businesses have created 15 million new jobs since the recession .
Twenty million Americans have health coverage and no one has seen a bigger drop in uninsured rates under the Affordable Care Act than Latino Americans .
We got more good news this week . A report came out showing that poverty is going down , and incomes for American families are going up , and Latino families have seen the biggest increase of all .
Now , that doesn't mean we rest on our laurels by any stretch .
Our work is far from finished . But I am more confident than ever that our best days are still ahead of us .
I believe with all my heart that the American Dream is alive and it 's big enough for everyone to share its promise .
That doesn't mean that lots of people are still not hurting , because I know they are .
And when you hear a presidential candidate spewing bigotry and hate , it 's easy to get discouraged .
But we 're here because we know this election is a choice between not just two people but two very different visions for our America 's future .
Either we 're going to make our economy work for everyone , or just those at the top .
Either we 're going to fear our differences , or embrace and celebrate our diversity .
Either we 're going to pit Americans against each other and deepen the divides , or we 're going to be stronger together .
Today , as you know , we 're in the midst of Hispanic Heritage Month .
In classrooms across America , children will study Dolores Huerta and Cesar Chavez , Julin and Joaqun Castro , Justice Sotomayor , Roberto Clemente and Laurie Hernandez , Gloria Estefan and Lin-Manuel Miranda , and countless others names we know and names we might not know , but every one of whom has enriched this country for generations .
Whether you 're Mexican , Puerto Rican , Cuban , Latin American , Afro-Latino , whether your family just arrived or has been here since before the United States even existed [ cheers ] , you 're not strangers .
You 're not intruders . You 're our neighbors , our colleagues , our friends , our families .
You make our nation stronger , smarter , more creative .
And I want you to know that I see you and I am with you , and time and again time and again we have seen that when we invest in the community , when we make it possible for Latinos to get the health care you need , get the education you desire , compete for jobs , start new businesses , pursue your dreams , all of America benefits .
As I said this afternoon in North Carolina , we are in the final stretch of this election .
And I intend to close my campaign the way I began my career , fighting for kids and families .
That 's been the cause of my life . It will be the passion of my presidency .
So tonight I want to mention two things I 'll do in the first 100 days of my administration to help families in every corner of America .
First , we do need to create an economy that works for everyone , not just those at the top .
There 's something wrong when Latinos are 17 percent of our country 's population but hold only 2 percent of its wealth .
We 've got to work together to connect more Latinos with good jobs that pay good wages , with more opportunities to get the skills they need , to go to college , to launch new ventures , to build wealth that can be passed on to your kids and your grandkids .
So we 're going to make , in my first 100 days , the biggest investment in new , good-paying jobs since World War II , jobs in infrastructure , manufacturing , technology , innovative , clean energy .
And we 're going to cut red tape and taxes and expand access to capital for small businesses , including the Latin o-o wned small businesses that create so many jobs and so much growth in communities everywhere .
And I want to give a particular shout-out to Latina small business owners .
Not everyone knows this , but you are among the fastest-growing group of entrepreneurs in America .
And we 're going to put families first with new solutions that reflect the way people live and work today .
Supporting families with paid family leave , earned sick days , and affordable childcare isn't a luxury , it 's a necessity .
When families are strong , America is strong . And that brings me to another important family issue .
In those first 100 days , I will send a proposal for comprehensive immigration reform to the Congress .
My proposal will keep families together , and it will include a path to citizenship .
Now , I know this isn't the first time you 've heard it .
In fact , people have been making the same promise for more than a decade .
But I believe with all my heart that some things are too important to give up on .
I 've been called a lot of things ; I 've never been called a quitter .
And in this election in this election , we have a chance to show that comprehensive immigration reform isn't just the smart thing to do , it 's what the American people demand .
And you know how we 'll show that ? Well , I hope to have a Democratic Congress next January .
[ Cheers . ] But no matter what , on my first day in office I will reach out to Republicans and say , this is your chance to help millions of families and show that your party , the party of Lincoln , is better than Donald Trump .
And while we 're fighting for comprehensive immigration reform , we 're going to keep families together .
When the deadlocked Supreme Court put DAPA and expanded DACA on hold for 5 million immigrants , it was devastating to millions of families .
But the court didn't actually rule on the substance of the case .
And as I 've said repeatedly , I believe DAPA and expanded DACA are squarely within the President 's authority , and will I protect them and keep fighting for them .
But in addition to defending DAPA and DACA , there 's more we can do .
We need a simple , straightforward system where other people with sympathetic cases who are contributing to their communities can make their case and be eligible for deferred action too .
Like people who experience and report extreme labor abuses . And we won't stop there .
We 're going to end family detention , close private detention facilities , and stop the raids and roundups .
No child should have to say goodbye to their parents every morning not knowing if their mom or dad will be there when they get home .
So here 's the bottom line . Comprehensive immigration reform will not only be the right thing to do , but it will add $700 billion to our economy and enable America to be what it 's always been a place where people from around the world can come to reunite with family , start new businesses , pursue their dreams , apply their talents to American growth and innovation .
Now , I know this has been a long road and we wouldn't be where we are today without your persistence and the quiet courage of families in every state of our union , and we certainly wouldn't be here without the bravery of the young men and women who have risked their very place in the United States by coming forward and fighting for their own future and the future of millions of others .
They helped change the conversation . And when President Obama created DACA , it changed their lives .
Right now , 750,000 undocumented young people in America are going to school , working , and planning for their future .
They 're DREAMers in much more than name . I 've met so many .
I 've listened to their stories . They 've done everything we 've asked of them and made our country stronger in return .
So when Donald Trump promises to rip that all away on Day One , when he promises to round up and deport all of the 16 million people living and working among us , including American citizen children who were born here to parents who are undocumented , these are the faces I see .
I picture Astrid Silva who I met in Las Vegas .
Many of you know her story : She came to this country from Mexico at the age of four with nothing but a doll , a cross , and the dress she was wearing .
Now she 's in her 20s , advocating for the rights of everywhere .
I picture a young man I never met , whose high school teacher wrote me a few months ago to share his story .
His teacher told me that his former student was funny , enthusiastic , and patriotic .
He played the drums in the school marching band and after graduation in 2005 , proudly enlisted in the U.S. Army .
Before shipping off to Iraq , he stopped by the school so everyone could see him in his new uniform .
He was , his teacher wrote , as respectful and optimistic as any student who ever entered my classroom . '
He was also a DREAMer , brought here as an undocumented child .
He loved America , and hoped one day to earn his citizenship .
But in April 2007 , while on a mission in Baghdad , he was killed by an improvised explosive device .
He was just 19 . The Army called him a hero and he was posthumously granted the American citizenship he 'd always wanted .
All these years later his teacher still treasures his memory .
And this teacher wanted me to know he wanted me to know that despite what Donald Trump may say , immigrants are not rapists and criminals .
The truth is , this young man may not have been born here , but he represented the best values of our country .
We teach our children that America is one nation under God , indivisible , with liberty and justice for all .
Not just for people who look a certain way or worship a certain way , but for all .
Everywhere I go , people tell me how concerned they are by the extreme policies and divisive rhetoric they 've heard from my opponent from the racist lie about Mexican immigrants that launched his presidential campaign to his racist attacks on a federal judge .
And every time we think he 's hit rock bottom , he sinks even lower .
His latest target ? A minister in Flint , Michigan who respectfully asked him not to use her pulpit for political attacks .
He called her a nervous mess . How insulting , how dead wrong .
Reverend Faith Green Timmons is not a nervous mess she 's a rock for her community in trying times , and she deserves better and so does America .
And again today , he did it again . He was asked one more time ,
Where was President Obama born ? ' And he still wouldn't still say Hawaii . '
He still wouldn't say America . ' This man wants to be our next president ?
When will he stop this ugliness , this bigotry ? Now , he 's tried to reset himself and his campaign many times .
This is the best he can do . This is who he is .
And so we need to decide who we are . If we just sigh and shake our heads and accept this , then what does that tell our kids about who we are ?
We need to stand up and repudiate this divisive rhetoric .
We need to stop him conclusively in November in an election that sends a message that even he can hear .
We need to set the kind of example we want for ourselves and our children and our grandchildren
Parents and teachers are already worried about what they 're calling the Trump Effect . '
Bullying and harassment are on the rise in our schools , especially targeting students of color , Muslims , and immigrants .
At a high school basket game in Indiana , white students held up Trump signs and taunted Latino players on the opposing team with chants of Build the wall ' and Speak English . '
Donald Trump is running the most divisive campaigns of our lifetimes .
His message is you should be afraid afraid of people whose race or ethnicity is different , or whose religious faith is different , or who were born in a different country .
There 's no innuendo or dog whistles anymore . It 's all right out there in the open now .
So we 've got to come back twice as strong and twice as clear .
Just this week , a mother in Florida wrote to me about her 11-year-old son , Francisco .
He 's proud to be American , Colombian , Ecuadorian , and Puerto Rican .
As he calls it , a potluck ' of Hispanic heritage .
And Francisco has been following this election very closely , his mother told me .
He wears his Love Trumps Hate ' pin every day and refuses to take it off .
When his father warned him that might make him a target for bullies , Francisco looked his father in the eye and he said : I was always told to stand up for myself and what I believe in .
And I believe Trump is wrong . ' And good for you , Francisco .
That 's what we have to do in this election , and that 's what so many of you are doing already : standing up to the bullying and bigotry wherever it comes from .
Together , we must send this resounding message , and we need to inspire a level of turnout that will help us win up and down the ticket .
We 've set an ambitious goal of registering and committing 3 million people to vote in this election that would not have otherwise voted , and we can't do it without you .
Nearly half of Latinos in America are under 35 , and we need you to show up and make your voices heard in this election .
So we 're going to keep asking for your help .
Keep hitting the campaign trail . Please talk to your friends , your neighbors , your community everyone you see between now and November 8th .
Tell them to go to hillaryclinton.com, or text JOIN , J-O-I-N to 47246 to get involved .
This election is too important for anyone to sit on the sidelines , as we heard from Congresswoman Sanchez .
So let 's stand up for a future where we put families first .
Where we build bridges , not walls . And yes , together we can prove love trumps hate .
Thank you all very much . I have to say it 's great to be back on the campaign trail .
As you may know , I recently had a cough that turned out to be pneumonia .
I tried to power through it , but even I had to admit that maybe a few days of rest would do me good .
And I 'm not great at taking it easy , even under ordinary circumstances .
But with just two months to go until Election Day ?
Sitting at home was pretty much the last place I wanted to be .
But it turns out having a few days to myself was actually a gift .
I talked with some old friends . I spent time with our very sweet dogs .
I did some thinking . The campaign trail doesn't really encourage reflection , and it 's important to sit with your thoughts every now and then .
And that did help me reconnect with what this whole campaign is about .
People like me we 're lucky . When I 'm under the weather now , I just want to have a conversation , and other people can wave their arms and their signs .
But I want you to think with me for a minute about how I certainly feel lucky .
When I 'm under the weather , I can afford to take a few days off .
Millions of Americans can't . They either go to work sick , or they lose a paycheck , don't they ?
Lots of Americans still don't even have insurance , or they do
but it 's too expensive for them to actually use .
So they toss back some Tylenols , they chug orange juice , and they hope that the cough or the virus goes away on its own .
Lots of working parents can't afford childcare , which in many states costs as much as college tuition .
So for millions of moms and dads , if they get sick , there 's no backup .
They 're on their own , aren't they ? That 's the story for too many people still in America .
When illness strikes , or an accident happens , you feel you 're on your own .
If you lose your job or can't afford college , you 're on your own .
If your aging parent starts needing more help , and you don't know what to do , you 're on your own .
Life events like these are catastrophic for some families , but mere bumps in the road for others .
I have met so many people living on a razor 's edge , one illness away from losing their job , one paycheck away from losing their home .
And that goes against everything we stand for as Americans .
Because some things should not come down to luck . Some things should be within reach for everyone , no matter what .
Like financial security . Like affordable health care . Like the peace of mind that comes with knowing that if something goes wrong , your family will be okay .
And above all , the knowledge that no matter what , your president is fighting for you and will always have your back .
That right there , that 's why I got into this race .
I am running for everyone working hard to support their families , everyone who 's been knocked down but gets back up .
The factory workers on their feet all day , and the nurses looking after patients all night .
I 'm running for young people like so many of you here , who dream of changing our world for the better , and for all the parents and grandparents supporting those dreams by dedicating every dollar they can spare to your education .
I 'm running for the LGBT teenager here in North Carolina who sees your governor sign a bill legalizing discrimination and suddenly feels like a second-class citizen .
And if anyone wonders what the costs of discrimination are , just ask the people and businesses of North Carolina .
Look at what 's happening with the NCAA and the ACC .
This is where bigotry leads , and we can't afford it not here , not anywhere else in America .
I 'm running for women like Janelle Turner . Back in May of last year , Janelle was diagnosed with breast cancer .
She went through nearly six months of very tough treatments .
Last October , she brought her eight-year-old daughter to one of our rallies in Iowa and they made a huge sign that read , Thirteenth chemo yesterday .
Three more . Hear me roar!' Wouldn't you want to meet the woman behind that sign ?
Well , I sure did . So we got talking , and we 've stayed in touch .
She keeps promising me she 'll see me at the inauguration .
And I tell her I 'll keep working to get there , but she 'd better be there too .
I 'm running for her and all the mothers and fathers trying to get and stay healthy so they can be there for their kids .
But perhaps most of all , I 'm running for those kids .
Standing up for children has been the work of my life .
As a lawyer with the Children 's Defense Fund , as First Lady in Arkansas , in the White House , as a Senator , I have fought for kids housed in adult jails , kids who have been neglected and abused , kids who couldn't get health insurance because of pre-existing conditions , kids with disabilities so they could go to school .
You heard today from someone I 've known for a long time , now grown up and a lovely young woman , Anastasia Somoza .
I learned from my family and my Methodist faith that we are each called to do all the good we can for all the people we can for however long we can .
And to me , that means making sure all our children have the chance to live up to their God-given potentials .
So when I meet a little girl in Nevada terrified that her parents are going to be deported , it hits me right in the gut .
When I meet a little boy in Flint , Michigan , who can't drink the water at home or in school because it 's poisoned with lead , that gets me going .
All I want to do is get to work making things better for them .
That 's why I care so much about national security too .
I want to give our kids a safer world . To me , that means a world with strong allies , more friends , fewer enemies , and fewer nuclear weapons .
It also means leading the fight against climate change so we can leave our kids a health planet .
My opponent in this race disagrees with me on every one of these fronts .
Just a few days ago he said that if another country 's troops taunted ours not fired at them , but taunted them , just taunts he 'd responded he would respond by blowing them out of the water .
He would start a war over that . That is just one more reason , my friends , why the stakes in this election are as high as any in our lifetimes .
I 've been involved in politics in one way or another for many years .
It is not an easy business . It can get rough and I 've built up some defenses .
When it comes to public service , I 'm better at the service ' part than the public ' part .
But this is why I do it , and this is who I 'm in it for : to make life better for children and families .
And that 's what this race has always been about for me .
Well , now we 're in the final stretch . There are just 54 days till Election Day .
Just 54 days till the most consequential vote of our lifetimes .
And just a little more than a month until early voting starts here in North Carolina .
Let 's make these days count , particularly here , because you know what your governor and legislature tried to do make it harder for young people to vote , harder for people of color , harder for people with disabilities , harder for the elderly .
There can't be any more motivation than that to make sure every young person , every person of color , every person with a disability , every older person turns out and votes .
So in these final days , let 's try to tune out all the chatter and the nonstop analysis that doesn't often have much to do with what the next president has to do to create good jobs , to create opportunity , to make it possible for every young person to afford to go to college or get the skills that you need for the jobs of the future .
Let 's talk about what really matters . And here 's my promise to you .
I 'm going to close my campaign the way I began my career and the way I will serve as your president should you give me that great honor
focused on opportunities for kids and fairness for families . Next week , I 'll go to Philadelphia to talk about challenges facing our young people ; in Florida , to focus on building an economy that welcomes everyone 's contributions , including people with disabilities ; then I 'll be back here in North Carolina , to meet with more working families .
From now until November 8th , everywhere I go , I 'm going to talk about my ideas for our country .
My campaign has rolled out detailed plans in 38 different policy areas
yes , somebody actually counted . Everything from reining in Wall Street to creating good-paying jobs to fighting Alzheimer 's to supporting people with autism .
You see , I have this old-fashioned notion that if you 're running for president , you should say what you plan to do , how you 're going to get it done , and how you 're going to pay for it .
You can read it all on my website , hillaryclinton.com .
We even put it in a new book called , you guessed it , Stronger Together .
Get a copy of it because it tells you everything Tim Kaine and I intend to do .
Now , like a lot of women , I have a tendency to over-prepare .
I sweat the details , whether we 're talking about the exact level of lead in the water in Flint , or how many North Carolina kids are in early enrichment programs , or the precise interest rate on your student loans right down to the decimal .
Because you know what ? It 's not a detail if it 's your kid .
It 's not a detail if it 's your family .
It 's a big deal . And it should be a big deal to your president .
Now , I confess , I 'll never be the showman my opponent is , and that 's okay with me .
Just look at look at the show he put on with Dr. Oz today .
But I am going to deliver for you and your family , just like I did for Sarah all those years ago with the Children 's Health Insurance Program , that gave her the chance to be the extraordinary young woman she is .
And I 'll tell you something else . People accuse me of all kinds of things .
You probably have seen that . But nobody ever accuses me of quitting .
And I will never give up , I 'll never walk away , no matter how tough the going gets .
I 'm actually asking Americans to hold me accountable for my ideas and hold my opponent accountable for his .
We don't need a president who says the minimum wage is too high .
We need a president who knows that Americans deserve a raise to get to a living wage .
We don't need a president who wants to take away people 's health coverage .
We need a president who wants everyone to have quality , affordable health care .
And we don't need a president who apparently thinks only married people deserve paid leave and only mothers stay home with kids .
We don't need someone who rushes out a half-baked plan just weeks before an election after decades of ignoring or putting down working moms .
We need a president who has spent years fighting for these issues , who has a plan to support all families in all their various shapes .
Ask yourself which candidate you can count on to be on your side , respect your family , stand up and fight for you and your kids .
That is who you should vote for on November 8th because as Michelle Obama said in her fabulous speech at the Democratic convention , when we go to the polls this November , the real choice isn't between Democrat or Republican .
It 's about who will have the power to shape our children for the next four years of their lives .
It 's also about the kind of country we want to be and what we want to leave behind for future generations .
People have to decide , are we going to make our economy work for everyone or just those at the top ?
Are we going to bring people together or pit Americans against each other and rip our country apart ?
Are we going to work with our allies to keep us safe , or are we going to put a loose cannon in charge who would risk everything generations of Americans have worked so hard to build ?
Now , I have a lot of confidence in the American people and in our country .
My opponent keeps running us down , saying we 're weak , a disaster , an embarrassment .
Every time he says things like that , I think about Janelle and her strength in the face of cancer , or Martha and Sarah in the face of their health challenges , and that little boy in Flint , who gets up every day and goes to school even though he can't drink the water .
See , my opponent has America all wrong . There 's nothing we can't do when we come together as one nation , set big goals , and pursue them .
And the American dream the American dream is big enough for everyone to share in its promise .
So if you believe the minimum wage should be a living wage , that no one who works full-time should have to raise their child in poverty , join us .
If you believe that every man , woman , and child in America has the right to affordable health care and women should be free to make our own health decisions , join us .
If you believe if you believe your working mother , wife , sister , or daughter deserves equal pay , then join us .
Get involved these last 55 days . Go to hillaryclinton.com or text join , ' j-o-i-n , to 47246 .
We need volunteers right here in North Carolina . We can't do this without you .
And remember , the presidential race isn't the only one this fall .
We 've got a lot of important statewide races . Let 's come together and send Deborah Ross to represent the people in the Senate .
Starting on October 20th , you can register and vote early at the same time at any one-stop early voting site in your county .
So the heat is on . Spread the word . Tell your friends , your family , your neighbors .
If you share our vision for America 's future , come be part of helping us shape it .
We do not have a minute to lose . We have so many blessings .
Now it 's our job to deliver on those and to make sure every single person , and particularly every child , no matter who they are , what they look like , or who they love , is part of the American dream now and way into the future .
Let that be our message . Let that be our mission .
Please come out and help us fight , fight for you , fight for our children , fight for our families .
Let 's make America all that it should be . Thank you and God bless you !
It 's great to be before this representative assembly , to have a chance to talk about the issues affecting public education .
Thank you Karen , Madam President , for that introduction .
It is great to be here with all of you .
I want also to single out someone who came with me tonight , a great champion of so many causes , Congresswoman Louise Slaughter .
You all know she is such a great fighter .
Her absolute commitment to the issues that matter to us and to your work in America have really put her head and shoulders above anybody else .
She 's been just a great advocate . And for those of you in Rochester , in her congressional district , please send her back in November !
So it 's great to be here in Rochester . It does feel like old times .
As your senator , I visited here probably more than 40 times , worked hand-in-hand with local leaders and businesses and schools to create jobs in clean energy and advanced manufacturing , connected farmers upstate with restaurants downstate , so people in Brooklyn and Queens could eat Red Jacket apples and drink Finger Lakes wine .
It was a terrific adventure , and I appreciate Karen welcoming me home .
New York took a chance on me back in 2000 , and I 'll never forget it .
And here today , I want to say from the outset that I 'm with you .
I will fight for you , I will stand up for you , and together we will do what we must to make sure public education [ inaudible ] .
Like you , I think hard about the questions that we are facing .
For example , how can we do better for the millions of children living in poverty in America ?
This is the first time I 'm aware of , historically , that we 've had a majority of poor children in our public schools .
How can we do better for the moms and dads working harder and harder every day just to get by ?
How can we do better when the jobs of the future will require creativity and ingenuity and collaboration yet our education system is increasingly focused on test preparation ?
I know that our teachers and schools do amazing things for our kids every day .
But I also know you can't do it alone . You need your country to have your backs , too .
If I 'm fortunate enough to be your president starting January 20 , 2017 , I will have your backs .
You can count on that . I want every teacher , principal , parent and student to know you will have a partner in the White House .
And that goes for everyone who helps our students succeed : teachers ' aides , social workers , guidance counselors , school nurses , speech and occupational therapists , everyone who helps our students achieve all that they 're capable of .
These issues are not new to me . When I got out of law school I went to work for the Children 's Defense Fund .
I did it because I was inspired by the woman who started CDF , Marian Wright Edelman , and I did it because I wanted to use my legal education on behalf of kids .
And I got off to a fast start : I was sent to Alabama to investigate segregated academies , to make the case against them getting tax-exempt status as they pulled people out of public schools , taking the resources and limiting the books , the shelves off the walls .
When my husband was governor of Arkansas , he asked me to chair a commission to improve education in our state .
We obviously knew our schools were in bad shape . In fact one expert said Arkansas had perhaps the worst schools in the country .
To me , that sounds like an emergency . So I went to work , had great support from people across the state , held hearings in every county .
Thousands of people turned out . We discovered that many schools couldn't even offer the basics , like chemistry or foreign languages forget about art or music .
So we worked to come up with a plan to get more schools the resources they needed .
We fought hard to get it passed by the legislature .
And a few years later , that same expert said that Arkansas had raised school standards dramatically , teachers had received desperately needed raises , and that we had done something which was hard to do which is to change the attitude of a whole state toward the importance of education .
Now , the reason I am telling you this history is because the lesson was clear to me
: We 've got to come together and fight together to give our schools and teachers the resources you need to succeed .
And we 've got to convince the whole country once again to support public education .
Every child in this country deserves a world-class education , with good schools and effective , well-supported teachers no matter what ZIP code they live in .
Because when we invest in education , we 're investing in our country 's future , and in creating a stronger economy for all of us .
I have a plan for how we should strengthen public education .
It comes from consultation with AFT and NEA . It boils down to TLC : teaching , learning and community .
I actually think our teachers and students could use a little TLC .
Tonight I want to focus on the T teaching .
We 've known for years that nothing in school matters more than an effective teacher .
Now America is asking more of our educators than ever before .
You 're asked to prepare our kids for a competitive economy , adapt your instruction to meet the diverse needs of your students , stay on top of new technologies and pedagogies , and adjust to a sea of reforms at the local , state and national levels .
We look to you to fill in gaps that we as a country have long neglected like giving low-income kids , English-language learners , and kids with disabilities the support they need to thrive .
And we ask you to help make right everything from poverty and homelessness , to child health disparities , to the legacy of racial inequities stretching back centuries .
These are major , complicated issues and they should not be dumped on all you , yours alone to bear .
One of my main goals as president will be to launch a national campaign to modernize and elevate the profession of teaching .
To reach out to encourage more talented young people to become teachers .
To reach out and encourage more talented mid-career professionals to do the same .
As senator , I fought to pass legislation to recruit and train outstanding teachers , including veterans , because I believe there are many dedicated people out there who join your ranks to serve our students well and be good colleagues to you , if given the chance .
Recruiting and retaining effective teachers starts , however , with something very basic : raising teacher pay .
I know I don't need to tell any of you , but teachers make nearly 15 percent less than other college graduates in America .
That adds up to a lot of money over a career .
So if we believe , as I do and then we give lip service to that teachers are professionals and that you do something valuable , we should pay you like we really believe it .
We should use other incentives , too like student debt forgiveness .
I supported this as your senator because I don't think it 's right that our future educators are finishing college loaded down with debt .
That , combined with low pay , means too many teachers are taking second or even third jobs just to get by and support their families .
It shouldn't be that hard to make it as a teacher .
That 's also why I supported a tax deduction for teachers who spend their own money on classroom supplies which is pretty much every teacher I know .
And while we 're at it at a time when the majority of teachers are women , we need to stand up and fight for equal pay for women .
It 's not just a woman 's issue , although of course it is .
This is a family issue . You have a mother , wife , sister , daughter , who are in the workforce the last I checked , there was no discount for being a woman when you checked out at the supermarket .
I don't think this happens , where a cashier looks and says ,
Well , you 're a white woman , so you only have to pay 77 cents to the dollar .
Or you 're an African American woman , you only have to pay 68 cents on the dollar .
Or you 're a Latina woman , you only have to pay 58 cents on the dollar .
There is no gender discount , and it 's time that we start treating equal pay as [ inaudible ] .
I also support raising the minimum wage nationwide , and I applaud the big step taken under Governor Cuomo 's leadership to raise the minimum wage .
Now , raising the minimum wage is a big deal in America .
There 's more work to be done , I grant you that .
I can point to California and New York , which have just raised the minimum wage , and be able to say , We are doing it , so let 's do it for everybody .
Let 's raise the minimum wage for everybody . We also have to convince decision makers at every level to respect and help to raise your professional standing in the eyes of your fellow citizens .
You know the research and the comparisons and analysis in countries like Finland and Singapore that score high in the international rankings , when you look behind the numbers what you find is this , it 's so obvious : Their teachers are treated with respect as the professionals that they are .
It 's actually pretty obvious , isn't it ? You treat somebody with respect , you give people the support they need to do this critical job , then you 're going to see how the whole system 's lifted up .
We 've got to do a better job of preparing and supporting teachers .
I want all teachers , at every stage of their careers , to know they 'll be able to keep learning , keep improving , keep innovating .
That goes for administrators , too . As senator , I worked with both UFT and NYSUT , along with AFT and NEA , to pass legislation to train and support not only teachers but principals , so that you have a whole-team concept that would make the difference for lots of students .
And supporting teachers means facing tough issues like over-testing . Many frustrated parents and teachers are saying enough is enough .
Tests should get back to their original purpose to get information to teachers and parents so we can know how our kids are doing , and work together to help them improve .
Let 's keep working to find a fair , balanced approach to testing , so our kids learn what they need to compete in a global economy , and you have the tools to help them get there .
Everything that I 'm talking about today is pretty straightforward , for those of you that are educators .
But I know it can only be done in partnership with you .
So I am asking you to work with me , just as I have worked as your senator .
I want your advice . I want your constructive criticism .
I want to be held accountable . I want to support you in fighting for your students and your profession .
That goes for the L and C portions of TLC , too .
L is for learning . Let 's build off what works .
Let 's go where the research and best practices point us .
You know , I have a dear friend who just retired from teaching .
And I asked her one time , What are the biggest differences from the time you started nearly 40 years ago to now that you 're retired ?
She made two great comments , I thought . One , she said ,
When I started , the children really understood that I was the authority figure .
I would stand in front of the class , and , you know , there 's the occasional kid that would misbehave , but in general kids were respectful , and understood what their role was and what mine was .
Now , she said , I feel like they all have remote control changers in their heads , and they 're just constantly in motion , not really able to sit there and listen and respond in a way that used to just be taken for granted .
The other thing she said is , It used to be that we would collaborate .
Teachers at a school , teachers in the district , principals , all of the professionals , and we would work toward deciding what it is we would try to achieve .
And we would very much rely on our own experience and also research to tell us what would work best .
She said , My last ten years of teaching , I just felt like the school district was prey for any fad that came along .
[ Inaudible ] . I said , Well , what did you do about that ?
She said , Well , I don't know . Maybe , if I 'd been a lot younger , I would have really gotten more involved and fought back .
What I really did was just lock my door to keep everybody out .
[ Inaudible ] , to keep my head clear to actually teach my students .
Now , I really wanted to repeat that to you because that made a lot of sense to me .
The kids to some extent have changed , the environments from which they are coming have changed , the pressure on kids has there 's no way that I could even relate to some of the challenges that kids bring , both personally , because of their own situation , but more generally , because of living in the virtual world online .
And I also respect her perspective that we 've got to figure out how best to teach the kids we have , not the kids we used to have .
How best to [ inaudible ] . Let 's take what is working , put it to work in every classroom .
I want every school district in America to offer programs in computer science and coding .
But in order to do that , we have to set that goal .
We have to be able to have a school that is wireable or has wireless to be able to do it .
I have a lot of schools in New York that are 80 , 100 years old , and that 's a hard challenge to me .
We have to do more to make sure we 've got all of the resources not just the teaching , but the equipment , and involve experts who should be part of the process .
We know that there will be created more than a million jobs in computer science over the next 10 years .
I want young people in New York and across America to be able to compete for those jobs .
That starts in our classrooms . And you know better than any that learning begins at the very start of a child 's life .
This is a passion of mine . If we don't invest in early child education and universal pre-kindergarten , we are making more jobs harder
and we are really [ inaudible ] a lot of our kids .
We 're making some progress now in preschool and universal pre-k .
I 'm proud that in New York City we now have universal preschool .
But this should be spread throughout the state and it should be in every state .
And every child should have the chance to develop his or her talents in those first five years of live .
You know , 80 percent of your brain is physically formed by the age of three .
So we need to help preschoolers get pre-literacy and pre-math skills , so they can then be prepared for the work that starts in kindergarten and first , second , and third grade .
Right now , in New York , low-income children come to kindergarten nearly a year behind in their language and math skills .
That makes it harder to catch up . That 's why we need to find programs that work .
I started a statewide program back in Arkansas to teach parents how to be their children 's first teachers .
I convened the first ever White House Conference on Early Childhood Development when I was first lady .
And when I left the State Department , I launched a national campaign called
Too Small to Fail , to try to close the word gap and help children at every income level get a strong start on their language development .
So we know that investing in preschool is not only good for individual kids ' education , it 's good for our economy .
And finally , we can't forget the C in TLC community .
As important as teachers are as important as the jobs you do happens to be you need the support of the communities you serve .
That comes down to all of us . There 's been way too much finger-pointing and scapegoating in public education .
And blaming teachers for everything you could imagine . I believe the real problem is that communities , states , and our country aren't stepping up to work with you , to do everything they can to help every child succeed in school .
So we 've made progress here in New York over the past 10 years .
Students have improved in reading and math . We still have a ways to go , as you know , to get everybody up to proficiency in these subjects but we 're making progress .
And a big part of the reason why it 's so challenging is because more students are living in poverty , more kids are coming from households that are struggling .
More kids are facing really difficult situations at they 're coming to school hungry , or after spending a night in a homeless shelter .
They have the weight of the world on their little shoulders .
And we need to do better . We can't just turn around and tell you to do better , we need to do better .
I do not believe that more testing will solve homelessness , or poverty , or [ inaudible ] .
So we 're going to do this together . We 're going to tackle all these problems as one country one American community .
And I will be there with you every step of the way .
I told both the AFT and the NEA during their endorsement process that I wanted them at every table where education was discussed .
[ Inaudible ] the front lines of education , information that I can only get from teachers and educators who are there .
A lot of teachers tell me we should go back to the concept of community schools bring in more non-profit organizations into the schools , make sure we have nurses in the schools , social workers in the schools .
Look , a lot of this is based on income inequality .
You 're from a well-off family , you get good mental health services , you have the chance to take piano lessons or join a soccer team or be in a play .
Those experiences have been stripped out of the budgets of so many schools , and those were often the way where kids find themselves , learning [ inaudible ] .
So we 've got a lot to talk about . But I just want to mention , briefly , that there are real differences among those of us who are running .
And it 's important to really follow it . Lots of folks don't even talk about education .
In fact , I 'm not even sure , in all the debates we 've had , I 've been asked one question about public education .
I may be wrong about that , but I don't think I have .
And what I want you to focus on and tell your friends , your neighbors is that we have a political fight on our hands .
There 's no doubt in my mind that any of the Republicans would be a disaster for public education .
Ted Cruz says he wants to abolish the Department of Education .
Donald Trump says he 'd largely eliminate it , but maybe he 'd leave some tentacles out there , whatever that means .
They want to slash and burn the public education infrastructure that millions of families rely on .
And they not only want to undermine they want to destroy unions .
I wish I could say that was unusual or unique to them , but that is the current Republican party 's priority .
That 's why they attack teachers at every turn . You 've got to remember , before he dropped out , Chris Christie was so proud of the fact that he [ inaudible ] .
What I really , really resent about this is not only that it hurts you and your it 's that it hurts our kids .
That sends a message , going back to my friend 's story , that people in positions of power and influence don't respect teachers .
So how do we expect kids to respect teachers ? Here 's the bottom line you know it , I know it : Our students deserve better .
We 've got to invest in our teachers if we 're going to give our kids a world-class education .
I am the product of great public schools and great teachers .
I think about them all the time . In first grade , Miss Taylor read us all Winnie the Pooh .
In fifth grade , Mrs. Krause taught us about Sputnik , and literally convinced us that President Eisenhower was watching to see if we did math and science .
In sixth grade , Miss King drilled us in grammar she had all of these poems that she used to use to tell us about nouns and verbs .
I still remember them . And in high school , my teachers challenged me .
They really pushed me hard . They helped me understand the world I lived in and what I might be able to do to make a difference .
That 's what my teachers did , and that 's what you do spark a student 's love for learning and change the course of his or her life .
I want all our kids to have those experiences and opportunities no matter where they live or how they start out .
My little granddaughter will be starting preschool in the no t-t oo-distant future .
I hope she loves school like her mom and I did .
I want that for every little girl and boy in America .
I know you do too . So , let 's be resolved that we 're going to change the politics and the attitudes of people in this country at all levels towards teaching and towards education .
We 're going to work for better schools , more resources , more support for educators .
I will be the president who helps you get that support .
I will make that promise , that [ inaudible ] , we will reconfigure federal spending so that those reflect the promises , made years ago , they intended for .
Title I was to help equalize spending , so that we must lift up the poorest schools and the poorest children .
In the 1970s , I worked with the Children 's Defense Fund to gather the evidence to make it possible to pass a law that gave kids with disabilities the chance to win the lottery , in their eyes , because they would get to go to school something they were not able to do before .
But we made a promise that the federal government would pay 40 percent of special education the most we 've ever paid is 17 percent .
Which is one of the reasons why budgets are being cut all the time , and many programs are being [ inaudible ] .
Because I know you 've got work to do tonight , but I love talking to you tonight about all of this because I am so convinced we 're going to make a big difference together .
I can't do it without you . I need your help in the NY primary on April 19 .
If all goes well and I 'm the nominee , no matter who the Republicans nominate , I 'm really looking forward to debating either Donald Trump or Ted Cruz .
Mr. Trump , tell me again about how you 're going to build this wall and make the Mexicans pay for it .
Tell me again why you think it 's a good idea for Japan and South Korea to develop nuclear weapons .
I mean , it 's going to be good . But I want you to just leave with this thought : I will get up every day trying to think about what I can do that day to get every child in this country the chance
I believe that that 's how we 'll make sure all of our kids get the chance to make the most of their God-given potential .
And I cannot even imagine how I would go about doing that without having you as my partners without working with you , without supporting you , without making the changes that we know are needed for some
TLC . So , as I leave you tonight , please know that I am convinced I am confident that together we will not only save public education , but we will improve it , and the entire country will have to see it for themselves .
Thank you all very much . Thank you very , very much , and thanks to Eric Dean , president of International Ironworkers , and to Fred McCraw , who is the union steward for Local 473 .
I am really honored to be introduced by them because I do care deeply about the work that they do , the work that is done by building trades skilled workers across our country .
And I 'm especially pleased to be here at a business that works closely and productively with their union .
I want to thank everybody associated with Munster Steel , in particular Jeanne Robbins and Ron Robbins and Patricia Martin , who gave me a tour and explained what I was looking at and how it ends up in those bridges and buildings and everything that is built , and built to really survive and perform the functions that it is supposed to .
It 's really great to be back here in northwest Indiana .
I want to thank Mayor Tom McDermott for welcoming me back to Hammond .
Thank you very much , Mayor McDermott . I also want to acknowledge Mayor Karen Freeman-Wilson from Gary .
Thank you for being here . I know there are other elected officials
the sheriff , the county sheriff is here ; the county treasurer ; council members ; state other state senators .
I am just really greatly honored to be here with you .
I want to say something to follow up on what Eric Dean said , because it had a profound effect on me .
I was a Senator on 9/11 from New York , and so I got to know a lot of the people who were directly affected certainly the families of the 3,000 victims , many of whom needed help ; the first responders who ran toward the building when it was first the first building that was hit , and kept running when the second building was hit ; the police , the firefighters , the EMTs and others who saved countless lives by getting people out of the towers before they collapsed .
But as Eric said , at the same time that the first responders were running toward the World Trade Center , so were ironworkers and other skilled trades workers .
The ironworkers in particular . I mean , there are a legion of stories of them literally getting off the worksite they were on somewhere else in New York , New York City , in New Jersey across the river , finding their way , hoping that because of their skills , they could aid in the search and rescue .
Sadly , there weren't very many people to be rescued .
People either died or escaped . But the ironworkers stayed on that pile for months , first to not only aid in search and rescue and recovery , but then to begin to move the debris , the steel beams off the site to begin to clear it .
So some of the ironworkers were on that pile for many , many months .
And what Eric is referring to is what became obvious within days , that being on that site , breathing that debris and that toxic air was going to cause harmful health effects .
And I became aware of that from visiting with and talking to and listening to ironworkers , police officers , firefighters and others .
And that 's when I began trying to help them get the health care that they need .
One of my prized personal possessions is a cross made for me out of a piece of steel from the pile by an ironworker who with whom I was meeting in a large group to talk about what I was trying to do to make sure that their health was tended to .
And he came up afterwards and said he had taken this piece of steel that had been burned , that was still showing the marks of the terrible event , and had made that cross for me .
So I have a particular sense of commitment to ironworkers , really to all the building trades , because of what you do every day to build our country , but also what I saw firsthand on that terrible day of 9/11 .
It 's a real honor to be in this plant , a family that has committed three generations to building this business and to carrying it on .
And Ron was telling me about some of the investigations that his father came up with to make this product even more effectively fabricated , whatever it might be .
So it 's a real reminder that we have in our country people who get up every single day and go to work to build America .
It 's now our challenge to figure out how we 're going to keep those jobs , grow those jobs , support those businesses , support those workers , support those unions , so that we can have a renaissance in manufacturing .
I believe passionately we can do this . That is why in this campaign I have laid out specific plans for how I would bring manufacturing back to places like Hammond , how I would work with business and labor to create the conditions that would enable us to do that , because it 's not enough just to diagnose the problem .
We all know we 're losing jobs . We all know that we are facing unfair competition .
We all know that we 've got forces in our own country who seem determined to undermine manufacturing for reasons that I find just absolutely absurd .
So if you 're looking at what 's happening , you can see people , and there are probably some in this plant , who are doing the same job as their parents did but less money and fewer benefits .
They 're doing everything right , but maybe they can't even find a job in their chosen profession .
And it 's got to be hard to be optimistic about the future .
And it 's clear that we 're giving too many Americans , particularly working Americans , a really raw deal .
So in this campaign , it 's important that people not just give speeches and get everybody riled up .
You need to ask them , what are you actually going to do and how are you going to do it ?
Give me the specifics . Don't just give me the rhetoric and the demagoguery .
And that is why I have tried to be as specific as possible .
I 'm just bewildered when I hear the Republican frontrunner , Donald Trump , actually say that wages are too high in America ; that 's why he doesn't support raising the minimum wage .
And Republican governors and legislatures like yours right here in Indiana are waging a relentless assault on workers ' rights .
And I know Ted Cruz has called for a national righ t-t o-work law .
Well , righ t-t o-work is wrong for workers , and it 's wrong for America .
And it 's important to stand up against these domestic efforts .
We 've got two sets of challenges . We have challenges from our own country , from businesses and political leaders who don't seem to understand that we still have to make it in America .
We 've got to make things and sell things around the world .
And then we 've got unfair competition coming from outside .
So I recently heard that your legislature repealed the common wage .
Is that right ? And it was supported by the chamber of commerce , I was told .
This is in total violation of Economics 101 . I mean , how do we grow the economy if people are not being paid what they deserve to be paid for the jobs they do ?
We are a 70 percent consumption economy . And if we don't pay people , we don't grow the economy .
That 's not good for families . It 's not good for businesses .
It 's not good for Indiana , and it 's not good for America .
So we 're going to go right at this . It 's one of the reasons why I 'm a strong supporter of the prevailing wage , of project labor agreements , and other ways of making sure that the people we depend on to actually build our country get paid what they should for it .
Now , I 've been following what 's been happening in Indiana , and I 've read about some of the very large layoffs and the jobs being moved out of Indiana , even moved out of our country .
I 've read about Carrier . And I 've got a set of plans that will incentivize companies who treat workers like the assets they are , not costs to be cut .
And it is important that we do everything possible to make any company that shifts jobs overseas pay back any tax benefits they got from the American people .
Now , Carrier in Indianapolis plans to close down operations and lay off 1400 workers .
UTEC in Huntington is laying off around 700 more . And that is just six months after their parent company spent $12 billion on stock buybacks for shareholders .
And I stress that point because there are a lot of folks who think they know that all of this is caused by trade agreements .
And I believe trade agreements contribute to it , but it 's also caused by quarterly capitalism , by activist shareholders , by company CEOs who don't put their workers , their long-term success and profitability , ahead of their own bonuses and the pressures that they are facing from the analysts that evaluate their stock .
So I 'm saying to CEOs who think they can make a quick buck by turning their backs on our country the country , by the way , that made them successful in the first place we are not going to let you take advantage of us anymore .
I 'm going to stand up to both CEOs at home and China abroad .
We are not going to let either one of these forces affect us .
So if they invest in America , we 'll stand with them .
If they pay their fair share , we 'll stand with them .
But if they cut and run , we 're going to pay a price .
So we need to have a policy coming from the very top in the White House where we don't just complain , we act , and we organize to act .
And that 's something that the ironworkers know a lot about , it 's something that we do by looking in the long term , and that is what this company knows a lot about .
I want to just say a few words about trade and steel .
One of the biggest and most important battles is over steel .
China and other countries , but primarily China have been dumping artificially cheap steel into our markets to gain an unfair advantage .
I really appreciate the fact that Munster Steel buys domestic steel .
I thank the Robbins family for that . In fact , they told me some of the steel they buy comes from a plant in Arkansas that I know quite a bit about because it was located there when Bill was governor of Arkansas .
So we 've got this problem with China and other countries .
And why is China doing this ? Well , because demand in their own country has slowed down .
But they want to keep their steel mills going because they want to keep people employed while they try to figure out what to do about their economy .
Well , that 's their problem , and we shouldn't let them dump it onto us .
And so what I am advocating is that , number one , they 're trying to solve their domestic economic problems on the backs of American workers .
It 's illegal , pure and simple . Steel is crucial to our manufacturing base , crucial to our national security , and I will not let this vital industry disappear .
I 'm going to make the steel industry 's survival one of my top priorities .
Now , I 've gone toe to toe with China 's top leaders on some very tough issues , and as president I will go to bat for all of our trades for our steelworkers , our ironworkers , everyone who is absolutely looking for that kind of champion .
We are going to use every tool we possibly can against China for their illegal actions .
I 'm going to appoint a trade prosecutor , reporting directly to me in the White House , who will look for every possible way to prevent them from continuing this behavior .
And I will have the federal government join with the trades and businesses in bringing trade cases against China .
We 're not going to wait for a union or a business to do it .
We 're going to join forces . We 're going to do it together .
We 're going to go after the Chinese . We are also going to reject
one of the reasons why I came out against the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement
we 're going to reject weak automobile rules of origin in trade deals .
That gives Chinese steel and other products an unfair back door to U.S. markets .
And it 's important that we recognize that it can still very well be Chinese steel even if it 's in a Japanese automobile .
So we 're going to trace all their steel . We 're going to have , as I said , a trade prosecutor who 's going to prosecute these cases .
And we 're going to send an absolute message : You 're not going to get away with this anymore .
When I was a Senator , I testified for our businesses , and at that time it was the steelworkers in New York , before the International Trade Commission against some of their behavior back about 10 years ago .
So I am committed to standing up and being as strong in this as I possibly can .
So standing up for workers , standing up for home-grown businesses , especially standing up for unionized businesses that recognize the importance of a high-quality workforce like the people standing right there .
Now , I think this is important for our whole country .
It 's especially important here in the Midwest . Nearly one in five jobs in Indiana is in the manufacturing sector .
That 's a much higher percentage than in much of the rest of the country right now .
I have a plan to invest $10 billion to bring unions , workers , businesses , universities , and the government together to create new manufacturing jobs .
I have what I call the Manufacturing Renaissance Tax Credit to encourage investments in communities that are hit hard by layoffs and plant closings .
I want to be a good partner for cities like Hammond and Gary that are really trying to get back jobs and are making all kinds of efforts to do that .
I know , from my own experience , American workers don't quit .
And I 'm not about to quit on them . We 're going to lift up manufacturing , and I 'm going to go after those politicians and decision-makers , whether they 're in Indianapolis or Washington , who have a very shor t-t erm memory .
They don't understand we built this country by making things and paying the people who make them a middle class wage .
The American labor movement helped to build the American middle class .
We have to bring back middle class jobs and wages .
We 've got to get families once again having a higher standard of living , feeling that they are able to look to a better future for themselves and their children .
I don't think there is a more important issue in this explanation .
I 'm going to bring that message to Indiana , as I brought it to Ohio , as I brought it to New York , brought it to Illinois , brought it to all the states that I have competed in , because it 's a message that I care passionately about .
So I wanted to come today and I wanted to come to a place that is really doing a great job , a great job in what you make , what you sell ; a great job in working with your employees ; a great job having good relationships with the Ironworkers Local .
I can tell you , this is the model I want to see us have across America .
And with your help , I will do everything I possibly can to make that come true .
Thank you all . Following events with young parents in Loudoun County , Virginia , and with working moms in Lexington , Kentucky , Hillary visited a family health clinic in Louisville , Kentucky , where she committed to capping family child care costs and expanding home-visiting programs for parents of young children .
She again reiterated her belief that we must enact paid family leave , raise the minimum wage and guarantee equal pay .
Well , I , for one , could listen to Bill for a long time .
His service along with all of you who have supported this center is really heartening to me because what you 've done is what we all know needs to be done providing comprehensive health care and making sure that people 's needs are addressed across the full range of health .
And I am thrilled to be here . I want to recognize former Lieutenant Governor Crit Luallen .
Thank you so much for being here , Crit . I also want to recognize former Secretary Audrey Haynes , former Secretary of Health and Human Services here in Kentucky .
I am very grateful to them for their service , for being here , but also because they were part of the Beshear administration that did an absolutely world-class job .
I don't suppose you need me to say that Kentucky 's expansion of Medicaid , the Connect program , was really held up as the best example of any state 's efforts .
And I know that it was a real team commitment the entire administration plus all in the health field who were working so hard to make it possible for more people in this beautiful state to have the health insurance that they deserved .
And I want to thank everyone here at Family Health Centers , which serves thousands and thousands of hardworking Kentucky families .
I just met some of the people who work here .
I met some of the patients . And they 're all just they 're so proud to be associated with such a special place .
And I am determined to do what I can to help lift up and celebrate organizations like this .
Nothing is more important than helping families , particularly hardworking families who need the kind of support that they get here at the Family Health Centers .
And I was thinking and several people as I was walking around were asking me about my granddaughter or they were mentioning that they had met my daughter , and it was
just last Sunday that we were celebrating Mother 's Day across our country , and a lot of moms were given homemade cards , maybe breakfast in bed , maybe pictures were taken .
I 've got a whole drawer of gifts like that .
And they 'll be treasured forever , but it 's also important that we recognize that our country should be celebrating families every single day and doing everything we can to support families not just with nice words but with real actions that can help parents , moms and dads , do the vital work of raising their children , which is the most important work any of us ever do .
And I 've heard from thousands of families who are struggling who are trying to figure out how to get from paycheck to paycheck .
They can't figure out how to pay for childcare and to put some money away for maybe college someday .
They 're struggling to be there for their kids , trying to succeed at home , succeed at work , and they 're finding how difficult that is how many stresses are part of it .
And for some families it 's even greater if they are raising kids with special needs or with chronic illnesses or they have mental health challenges in their families .
And in places that have been devastated by job losses not far from here , where coal , steel and rail jobs are disappearing , raising a family becomes even harder .
I was with some moms and dads yesterday in Northern Virginia talking about the challenges that they all face how to balance work and family and a few brought their children with them .
And we were impressed that all these children were so patient and their moms were keeping them occupied and happy .
But it was really important to hear from each of them what they think they need to do the job and how they can get more help .
These moms and dads are running into the middle-class squeeze that many families face .
Their relative incomes are the same or lower than they were some years ago , but the cost of everything is higher , so even with two incomes economic pressures are enormous .
And one mom said she 's paying $ 16,000 a year for childcare , which means that there 's nothing to put away for college , and they 're balancing their budget every week trying to make sure they 've got the money they need for everything else .
Earlier , in Lexington today , I met with another group of moms and dads at the Family Care Center near the university , and just about every single one of them said how invaluable it was to have a place where they could come to get help to meet the needs of their kids , including childcare , home-visiting programs , medical checkups .
That was such a relief , and a lot of them didn't even know that such a program was available until they really needed it and found their way to it .
That freed them up to focus on work , knowing that their kids were in safe hands .
I hear this across the country , because so many families really don't know where to turn .
And the parents I 've met over the past few days and parents that I 've met over the past many years may come from different backgrounds , they may earn different incomes .
They 're Democrats and Republicans , but they 're facing the same challenges and they desperately want to give their kids a good life and they are needing help to deal with the pressures , because they can't figure out often how to solve all of this on their own .
So today , even , walking around with Bill , I met parents just very briefly who come here to this center for all of their medical and health needs .
It gives them peace of mind , not just services .
And that 's just something every parent can understand getting that peace of mind .
I know what it was like so many years ago trying to balance family and work , when my daughter would get sick as I was on the way out the door to work , how I would find somebody to help me take care of her because , of course , if she were sick , the babysitter was also sick .
And that 's the kind of everyday , real challenge that families are facing .
And I want us to be really focused on what we 're going to do to make it easier for families to get ahead and stay ahead .
And it 's going to be one of the major issues that I 'm going to keep talking about because I don't think there is anything more important .
I know I was lucky all those years ago that I had backup .
And I know a lot of parents are trying as hard as they can .
So what can we do to get our economy and our workplaces that were , frankly , built for a different time , when you had a stay-at-home parent , predominately moms , and one income could support a family but that 's just not the way it is for the vast majority of American families any more .
And so what we 've got to figure out is how to move our family policy into the 21st century and to do more to help women and men find meaningful work , to earn a good living , but to take care of their most important responsibilities .
So I 've been thinking a lot about what we can do .
How do we make government policies more efficient ? How do we make them more responsive to everything that people have to do , to raise their kids and look after the home and be there to earn a living and build a career ?
Because I don't think we can keep going on like this .
We can't keep saying , families just have to buckle down and tighten their belts and figure it out .
I think belts are about as tight as they can get for the vast majority of families .
People are using every single hour of their day , and there 's still not enough time to get everything done .
And too many parents are lying awake at night trying to figure out how in the world they 're going to make it all work .
So something 's got to change , and there isn't one-size-fits-all .
We need a menu of options in a country as diverse as ours .
And I think there are a number of things we could do that would make real differences for families .
Let 's create a national system of paid family leave .
Too many new parents really don't know how to handle the family responsibilities .
Too many moms have to go right back to work after their babies are born , or they try to cobble together vacation days and sick days and unpaid leave , shor t-t erm disability , anything to get more time with their babies .
Many don't even get a paid day off to give birth .
That 's just almost impossible for many people in many workplaces to believe , but it happens to be true .
There is no requirement that people get earned sick days , that they get the kind of support that they need .
And too many dads and parents of adopted children don't get any paid leave at all , and neither do sons and daughters who are struggling to take care of aging parents .
I just don't think this is fair to families , and that we can and should do better .
California 's had paid leave for a number of years .
They in fact just expanded it to cover more of the pay needed and to cover more family members .
And their economy 's doing just fine . The arguments we all hear , like ,
Oh , my gosh , you can't do that , we will structure a plan that will be sensitive to small businesses with few employees .
But we 've got to move with the rest of the world , the advanced economies in the world that provide paid leave programs .
I also want to expand home visiting programs nationwide . In some states , nurses , social workers , volunteers who are trained go right into the home .
And we heard about a great program in Lexington . They answer questions about nursing or sleep training .
They screen for health and developmental benchmarks so problems can be caught early .
They emphasize how important it is to talk , read , and sing to your baby to build your baby 's brain , which will better prepare your child to succeed in school .
Every family deserves that support , no matter where they live .
And the testimonials to the home visiting program that I heard in Lexington were just so glowing about what it meant .
I brought a home visiting program for toddlers to Arkansas called the Home Instruction Program for Preschool Youngsters , and it really works .
It really helps not only prepare kids . You know what else it does ?
It helps parents , predominately mothers and grandmothers , if they are caring for children , feel competent and confident in being that educator in the home that every child needs to have .
We also have to raise families ' incomes . Start by raising the minimum wage at the national level , which would give that would give millions of American families two-thirds of minimum wage workers are women .
So it would give a lot of single-parent families a much-needed boost in their income .
And then of course we have to guarantee equal pay for women 's work because when when a woman is paid unfairly , that doesn't just shortchange her .
It shortchanges the whole family . And it hurts them down the road in the form of lower Social Security contributions and retirement savings .
And I want to do more to encourage employers to embrace family-friendly policies , and here 's just one example .
There are these new sophisticated scheduling software programs that help employers squeeze every last once of productivity out of their workforce .
But they also throw their workers ' families into chaos .
Too many workers don't even know what shift they 're working until the last minute .
If they have kids , that means they 're constantly scrambling to line up childcare .
And how can you even plan to take your child to the doctor or go to the teacher 's conference or sit down at the dinner table as a family if you are working until 1:00 a.m. , and then you 're told you have to report back at 4:00 a.m. ?
And it just infuriates me because I have talked to predominately women who are on these kinds of unpredictable , absolutely back-breaking schedules .
That instability is not what families and kids need . So I want to do more to work with businesses and workers to help workers gain more control over their schedules .
We cannot be sacrificing families and children for these unpredictable scheduling choices that are really not necessarily .
You cannot convince me that you can't do a little better planning .
In fact , if businesses can't , then there 's something wrong .
They need to get some help themselves because that 's not a very smart organizing or managerial approach .
And then we 've got to put quality childcare within the reach of every family .
Right now , in many states , childcare is more expensive than college tuition .
That is just a shocking figure . Now , we know that college is too expensive , and that 's why I 'm advocating for debt-free college .
But for many families , childcare costs are even more , and it puts parents in an impossible position .
Either they put their kids in a not-so-great place and spend the whole day worried and distracted , or they do whatever it takes to pay for childcare , even if it means taking on debt ; or they decide they just can't afford it , so one parent stays home or they put their child in a setting they 're not enthusiastic about .
And I 've been talking with so many parents that are just caught in this childcare bind .
And if they leave the workforce predominately , again , the mothers then it makes it harder to get back in the workforce and to get paid what they should have been paid anyway .
And for single-parent families , these choices are even more difficult .
So I think we 've got a lot to do to make quality childcare affordable for all working families and to move us toward a much more family-friendly set of policies .
I looked it up , and here in Kentucky two parents earning the minimum wage have to spend about 20 percent of their income on childcare .
For a single parent , that number goes up to 40 percent .
Now , if we 're going to say we are for family values , then we need to value families .
And no family should have to pay more than 10 percent of their income on childcare .
And under my plan , that would be what we would do .
And at the same time , we would work to give childcare workers a raise because despite how high the price is for families
, the people who actually do the work aren't paid well at all .
A lot of them are minimum wage workers , and a lot of them can't stay in the profession because it just doesn't provide enough of a living .
In fact , in many places dog trainers are paid more than childcare workers .
And I 've talked to a lot of childcare workers who can't give their own children the care that they want them to have .
And with the high turnover , it doesn't lead to the quality that any family should expect .
So I want to make childcare a profession that attracts and retains talented , qualified workers .
As president , I would support states and cities that take steps to increase pay for childcare providers and early educators while at the same time making childcare more affordable for families by having a bigger government backstop .
What I learned today in Lexington , they have a really great program , and they get subsidies from the state .
They have a sliding scale of payment that is affordable .
And that 's exactly what we need to be doing for everyone .
And I want to help students who are also parents .
That means getting more childcare centers on or near college campuses , like the one I visited today near UK . It also means easing the financial burdens on student parents so they don't give up on school because they can't afford it .
Back in Arkansas , I helped to start a scholarship for single parents , called the Arkansas Single Parent Scholarship Fund , to help defray some of the costs that single parents ran into because if your childcare falls apart , you can't go to class .
If your old car you 're living out in the country and it 's the only way you can get to college dies , you can't get there because and lots of places in Arkansas , Kentucky , and elsewhere , there 's not a lot of mass transit that 's going to get you to school .
Right ? So we 've got to do more . I 'd like to do something similar to what I did in Arkansas nationwide because parents who get their degrees their community college degrees , their four-year degrees have better job options and better incomes down the road .
So if we 're serious about helping and supporting families , we 've got to do more to support parents who are in school .
Now , every issue that I 've mentioned , of course , matters to women .
But let 's remember , they matter to men , too .
We need to help dads just as much as moms , and that goes for every kind of dad and every kind of mom .
It shouldn't be about politics . It should be about families .
Now , having said that , we are in the middle of a presidential election right now , and there are real differences between what I believe , what we believe , and what the presumptive Republican nominee believes because at a time when families are struggling to pay for childcare and so much else , Donald Trump actually stood on a debate stage and argued that Americans are being paid too much , not too little .
He 's even talking about getting rid of the federal minimum wage , leaving it totally to the states , to the mercy of Republican governors , who have already cut the minimum wage for state workers .
And that 's happened right here in Kentucky . And it 's troubling to me because if you 're going to grow the economy , I think it 's kind of obvious you want people to be making money so that they can actually spend it and put it back into the economy .
Donald Trump wants to get rid of the Affordable Care Act .
Your governor is working hard to undermine what Kentucky has accomplished .
So I think with somebody like Donald Trump , you would see a race to the bottom across our country , with working families paying the price .
And I don't think that 's a risk we can afford .
So we have to reject that vision and instead come up with a much more positive one for families and children .
I love being here at this center because I can see how patient-oriented and family-oriented you are .
And I 've fought for a very long time for childcare and paid leave and early learning .
And I 've done it because , obviously , I believe in it , and I 've lived the work-family balancing act , trying to be a good mom , trying to be a good person at work .
But I really believe that healthy , secure families are the foundation of a strong economy and a strong country .
So for me , this goes way beyond the specifics .
And I would be so proud to be the champion of a center like this , or like the center I saw in Lexington , to carry your mission into the White House , and try to move into the 21st century with our family and health policies .
I am defending the Affordable Care Act because it is working .
And if somebody has a better idea , of course we will listen to it .
But Kentucky did a really good job in getting people connected , and I met two people signing up just upstairs a few minutes ago .
If it ain't broke , don't mess with it . Right ?
And so I 'm going to continue to speak out on behalf of the Affordable Care Act .
And when people say they want to repeal it , they want to end it , they really can't tell you what they want to do because what they want to do will just send us back to where we were , where we had so many uninsured people , so many people suffering , so many people left out of the health care system .
I think we are so much better off now than we were .
And I know it gives a lot of peace of mind to mothers because we are the principal purchasers and motivators for health care .
All the studies show that . We 're the ones getting the checkups .
We 're the one urging people in the family to go to the doctor for X , Y , and Z .
So we know that we need a system we can rely on .
And in order to have that system , we need a country that really values what you do here at the center , that is behind you all the way .
And I 've always believed , as some of you know , that it takes a village to raise a child , that we have a responsibility to support each other and create the best possible environment for kids to grow up so they , too , can thrive .
Because when families are strong , America is strong . I think it 's really as simple as that .
And so for me , I want to do everything I can , working with you , visionaries who have created this great comprehensive health center , to do more on behalf of all of our families .
So I 'm really here to say thank you for leading the way .
Thank you very much . Thank you all ! Tonight caps an amazing journey .
A really , really long journey . It 's wonderful to be back in Brooklyn , here in this beautiful building .
It may be hard to see , but we 're all standing under a glass ceiling right now don't worry , we 're not smashing this one .
Thanks to you , we 've reached a milestone the first time in our history that a woman will be a major party 's nominee for President of the United States .
Tonight 's victory is not about one person . It belongs to generations of women and men who struggled and sacrificed and made this moment possible .
Tonight belongs to all of you . I want to thank all the volunteers , community leaders , activists , and organizers who supported our campaign in every state and territory .
Thank you for talking to your neighbors and for making contributions to hillaryclinton.com .
Your efforts have produced a strong majority of the popular vote , victories in a majority of the contests , and after tonight , a majority of pledged delegates .
I also want to thank all the people across this country who 've taken the time to talk with me .
I 've learned a lot from you about the persistent problems and the unfinished promise of America .
So many of you feel like you 're out there on your own , and no one has your backs .
Well , I do . I hear you , I see you , and if I 'm fortunate enough to serve as your president , I 'll always have your back .
I want to congratulate Senator Sanders for the extraordinary campaign he has run .
He 's spent his career fighting for progressive causes and principles , and he 's excited millions of voters , especially young people .
Let there be no mistake : Senator Sanders , his campaign , and the vigorous debate we 've had about how to raise incomes , reduce inequality , and increase upward mobility have been very good for the Democratic Party and for America .
This has been a hard-fought , deeply-felt campaign . But whether you supported me , or Senator Sanders , or one of the Republicans , we all need to keep working toward a better , fairer , stronger America .
It never feels good to put your heart into a cause or a candidate you believe in and to come up short .
I know that feeling well . But , as we look ahead to the battle that awaits , let 's remember all that unites us .
We all want an economy with more opportunity and less inequality , where Wall Street can never wreck Main Street again .
We all want a government that listens to the people , not the power brokers , which means getting unaccountable money out of politics .
And we all want a society that is tolerant , inclusive , and fair .
We all believe that America succeeds when more people share in our prosperity .
When more people have a voice in our political system .
When more people can contribute to our communities . We believe that cooperation is better than conflict , unity is better than division , empowerment is better than resentment , and bridges are better than walls .
It 's a simple but powerful idea . We believe we are stronger together .
The stakes in this election are high . And the choice is clear .
Donald Trump is temperamentally unfit to be president and Commander-in-Chief .
And he 's not just trying to build a wall between America and Mexico he 's trying to wall off Americans from each other .
When he says , Let 's make America great again , that 's code for let 's take America backward .
Back to a time when opportunity and dignity were reserved for some , not all .
Promising his supporters an economy he can't recreate . We want to write the next chapter in American greatness , with a 21st-century prosperity that lifts everyone who 's been left out and left behind , including those who may not vote for us but who deserve their chance to make a new beginning .
When Donald Trump says a distinguished judge born in Indiana can't do his job because of his Mexican heritage , or mocks a reporter with disabilities , or calls women pigs , it goes against everything we stand for .
We want an America where everyone is treated with respect and their work is valued .
Donald Trump doesn't believe we are stronger together . He has abused his primary opponents and their families , attacked the press for asking tough questions , and denigrated Muslims and immigrants .
He wants to win by stoking fear and rubbing salt in wounds .
And reminding us daily just how great he is . We believe we should lift each other up , not tear each other down .
We need to give America a raise not complain that hard-working people 's wages are too high .
We need to help young people struggling with student debt not pile more on to our national debt with giveaways to the super-wealthy .
We need to make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century , not insist that climate change is a hoax .
To be great , we can't be small . We have to be as big as the values that define America .
And we are a big-hearted , fair-minded country . We teach our children that this is one nation under God , indivisible , with liberty and justice for all .
Not just for people who look a certain way or worship a certain way .
For all . Indivisible . This election isn't about the same old fights between Democrats and Republicans .
This election is different . It 's about who we are as a nation .
It 's about millions of Americans coming together to say : We are better than this .
We won't let this happen in America . If you agree whether you 're a Democrat , Republican or independent
I hope you 'll join us . In just a few weeks , we 'll meet in Philadelphia , which gave birth to our nation in that hot summer of 1776 .
Those early patriots knew they 'd all rise or fall together .
Today , that 's more true than ever . Our campaign will take this message to every corner of the country .
We 're stronger when our economy works for everyone , not just those at the top , with good-paying jobs and good schools in every zip code , and a real commitment to all families and all regions of our country .
We 're stronger when we work with our allies around the world to keep us safe .
We 're stronger when we respect each other , listen to each other , and act with a sense of common purpose .
We 're stronger when every family in every community knows they 're not on their own , because we 're all in this together .
It really does take a village to raise a child and to build a stronger future for us all .
I learned this a long time ago , from the biggest influence in my life : my mother .
She was my rock , from the day I was born till the day she left us .
She overcame a childhood marked by abandonment and mistreatment , and somehow managed not to become bitter or broken .
Mom believed that life is about serving others . And she taught me never to back down from a bully , which it turns out was pretty good advice .
This past Saturday would have been her 97th birthday . She was born on June 4 , 1919 .
Some of you may know that date . On the very day Mom was being born in Chicago , Congress was passing the 19th Amendment to the Constitution , giving women the right to vote .
I wish Mom could be here tonight . I wish she could see what a wonderful mother Chelsea has become .
I wish she could meet our beautiful granddaughter Charlotte . And I wish she could see her daughter become the Democratic Party 's nominee for president of the United States .
Yes , there are still ceilings to break for women and men , for all Americans .
But don't let anyone tell you that great things can't happen in America .
Barriers can come down . Justice and equality can win .
Our history has moved in that direction slowly at times , but unmistakably thanks to generations of Americans who refused to give up or back down .
You are writing a new chapter of that story . This campaign is about making sure there are no ceiling
no limits on any of us . And this is our moment to come together .
Go to hillaryclinton.com and contribute what you can . Text JOIN to 47246 and help us organize in all 50 states .
Every phone call you make and every door you knock will help move us forward .
I 'm going to take a moment later tonight to sit and fully absorb the history we 've made here .
But what I care about most is the history our country has yet to write .
Our children and grandchildren will look back at this time , at the choices we 're about to make , the goals we will strive for , the principles we will live by .
We need to make sure they can be proud of us .
The end of the primaries is only the beginning of the work we 're called to do .
If we stand together , we 'll grow together , and rise together .
Because we 're stronger together . Thank you all . May God bless you and may God bless America .
Hello , Miami . I am so excited and grateful to be here with all of you .
I must say , after everything we 've just seen at the Republican Convention this past week being here with you on this beautiful day is truly like a breath of fresh air .
When I look out at all of you , you know what I see ?
I see America 's future . Instead of the fear and the anger and the resentment , the lack of any solutions to help working families get ahead or keep our country safe , I sense the confidence , the optimism that you know what ?
we are stronger together and we 're going to make that future better .
Donald Trump may think America 's in decline , but he 's wrong .
America 's best days are still ahead of us , my friends .
And when he says , as he did say ,
I alone can fix it ' he 's not only wrong , he 's dangerously wrong .
We Americans we solve problems together . And if Donald doesn't understand that , he doesn't understand America .
I know that no one does anything all alone , and part of our challenge is to make sure we do work together .
I 'm looking forward to working with your elected officials .
I want to thank Senator Bill Nelson , who was with me yesterday in Orlando and Tampa .
I want to thank Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz . And I 'm looking forward to working with her and with Congresswoman Frederica Wilson and Congressman Alcee Hastings .
And I want to thank all the elected officials from all levels of government who are here and supporting our campaign and our vision for the country .
Now , next week next week in Philadelphia , we will offer a very different vision for our country , one that is about building bridges , not walls , embracing the diversity that makes our country great , lifting each other up , standing together , because we know there 's nothing we can't accomplish once we make up our minds .
And that 's why I am so thrilled to announce that my running mate is a man who doesn't just share those values , he lives them .
I have to say I have to say that Senator Tim Kaine is everything Donald Trump and Mike Pence are not .
He is qualified to step into this job and lead on day one .
And he is a progressive who likes to get things done .
That 's just my kind of guy , Tim . We both grew up in the Midwest .
We were raised by fathers who ran small businesses and who taught us about the dignity of work and the discipline of a job well done .
And in both of our families , faith wasn't just something you talked about at church on Sundays .
It was a call to serve others in every way that we can .
And as you get to know Senator Kaine , you will see that Tim 's lifelong commitment to social justice is a shining example of his faith in action .
During law school , when his fellow classmates were taking internships at prestigious law firms , he took time off to work with missionaries in Honduras .
And after he graduated from Harvard Law School , he could have done anything , but instead he chose to become a civil rights lawyer .
One of his first cases was a pro bono case representing a woman who was denied an apartment because she was African American .
So while Tim was taking on housing discrimination and homelessness , Donald Trump was denying apartments to people who were African American .
He is still fighting those battles today , serving as a non-partisan city council member , and then the mayor of Richmond , Virginia .
He worked hard to bridge racial divides . He built the first new schools in a generation .
He helped turn that struggling city around . And as governor of Virginia , he led the commonwealth through the worst financial crisis in a generation .
What did he do ? He brought Democrats and Republicans together to protect the programs that working families count on .
And while Mike Pence slashed education funding in Indiana and gave more tax cuts to the wealthiest Tim Kaine cut his own salary and invested in education from pre-K through college and beyond .
And by the time Tim left office , 40 percent more of Virginia 's kids were enrolled in early education programs .
And then as a United States senator , Tim has used his positions on the Foreign Relations and Armed Services Committees to stand up for our veterans and our values and our men and women in uniform and our security .
Now , there 's no doubt in my mind because I 'm here with him that Tim is so qualified to be vice president , and as I have said many times , the most important qualification when you are trying to make this really big choice is can this person step in to be president .
Well , at every stage of Tim 's career , the people who know him best have voted to give him a promotion .
And that 's because he fights for the people he represents , and he delivers real results .
Now , I can't wait for all of you to get to know him the way that I have , the proud father of three grown-up kids who have their own lives and are making their own contributions , including serving our country a loving husband of a brilliant wife , who is a great fighter for progressive causes in her own right ; the leader who cares more about making a difference than making headlines and make no mistake behind that smile , Tim also has a backbone of steel .
Just ask the NRA . Over and over again he has had the courage to stand up to the gun lobby in their own back yard .
After the horrible Virginia Tech shooting , he signed an executive order to keep guns out of the hands of those who were deemed severely mentally ill .
And he has fought for common-sense gun from across the country , as we saw just a few weeks ago when he joined the 15-hour Senate filibuster asking that we get those reforms done .
So when I say he 's a progressive who likes to get things done ,
I mean it . He 's not afraid to take on special interests , whether he 's calling for tough regulations on payday lending , or fighting back against a tax on Planned Parenthood and defending a woman 's right to make our own health decisions .
Tim has led on some of the most important issues facing our country , from voting rights to LGBT equality to criminal justice reform to comprehensive immigration reform .
Now , after last week , I probably don't need to say this , but I will .
This is one of the most consequential elections in our lifetimes .
When someone says , I alone can fix it , ' that should set off alarm bells in not just Democrats ' minds , but Republicans , independents , people of all ages and backgrounds .
That is not a democracy . I said yesterday in Tampa , we fought a revolution because we didn't want one man making all the decisions for us .
And besides , it is just nonsense . No one does anything alone .
We don't have a one-person military . We don't have a one-person teaching corps .
We don't have one doctor and one nurse who fixes everything , do we ?
We work together . That is what has traditionally set us apart from places that have turned to single leaders , despots , dictators , authoritarians , who have promised people ,
I can fix it alone . ' You know what that says about us ?
That somehow we 're helpless ? We can't do this work that needs to be done in America ourselves ?
That we can't reach out to one another ? That we can't make the economy work for everyone , not just those at the top ?
I reject that . I reject that . And next week , starting on Monday in Philadelphia , you 're going to see a very different kind of vision .
So I wanted to come here to Miami . I wanted to come here to introduce you to the person that I just can't think of anybody better to have by my side on the campaign trail , in the White House .
Together we are going to take on the challenges that are hurting Americans .
We are going to give the middle class a raise .
We are going to give tax relief to working families to help with the rising costs of raising kids .
We are going to create more good jobs . We 're to make sure every child in America has the chance to live up to his or her God-given potential .
So please , join us . Join us . Take out your phone right now .
Text join ' to 47246 or go to hillaryclinton.com because we are hiring organizers right here in Florida right now .
So be involved in every way that you can because together we 're going to win this election and move our country forward .
Please join me in welcoming the next vice president , my friend , Senator Tim Kaine !
TIM KAINE : Hey , guys , thank you ! Hello , Miami !
Hello , FIU ! bienvenidos a todos ! a todos en nuestra pas , verdad , porque somos americanos todos !
I 'm feeling a lot of things today , most of all gratitude .
I 'm grateful to you , Hillary , for the trust that you 've placed in me , and we 're going to be compaeros de alma in this great lucha ahead .
I 'm grateful to the country which has given me so much .
I 'm grateful to all of you Floridians , my Virginians , all Americans who 've poured their hearts into this wonderful , wonderful campaign .
And today , like every day , I 'm especially grateful to my wife Anne
I love you , honey . I love you , honey and to three beautiful kids , Nat , Woody , and Annella .
I am the luckiest dad and the luckiest husband in the world .
This is quite a week for me . And believe it or not , for as powerful as it is to become Hillary Clinton 's running mate , that 's not the only thing on my mind this week .
Anne and I have three kids . Our oldest son Nat is here today with his fiance .
He 's a proud Marine . And in just a few days , he 's deploying to Europe to uphold America 's commitment to our NATO allies .
For me , this drives home the stakes in this election .
Nearly two million men and women put their lives on the line for this country as active duty , as reservists , as guard members .
They deserve a commander-in-chief with the experience and the temperament to lead .
What does Donald Trump say about these great Americans , these two millions ?
He repeatedly calls the American military a disaster . '
And just this week Donald Trump said that as president , he 'd consider turning America 's back on our decades-old commitments to our allies .
And all of you remember a few months ago when he said about a Senate colleague of then-Senator Clinton 's and mine , John McCain , that he wasn't a hero because he had been captured and served as a prisoner of war in Vietnam .
And he wants to be commander-in-chief ? While our service members are out there on the front lines , Trump 's saying he 'd leave our allies at the mercy of an increasingly aggressive Russia , and folks , that 's an open invitation to Vladimir Putin to just roll on in .
Even a lot of Republicans say that that 's terribly dangerous .
When you AUDIENCE MEMBER : [ ] crazy .
TIM KAINE : Alright , I 'm hiring for the speechwriting team .
That We 've seen again and again that when Donald Trump says he has your back , you 'd better watch out .
From Atlantic City to his so-called university , he leaves a trail of broken promises and wrecked lives wherever he goes .
We can't afford to let him do the same thing to our country .
And folks , we don't have to because Hillary Clinton is the direct opposite of Donald Trump .
AUDIENCE : Hillary ! Hillary ! Hillary ! TIM KAINE : Hillary Clinton , she doesn't insult people , she listens to them .
What a novel concept , right ? She doesn't trash our allies , she respects them .
And she 'll always have our backs that is something I am rock-solid sure of .
I know that because Hillary knows that we 're stronger together ; we 're stronger when we work together , when we grow together , when we pull together , when we live in the same neighborhood and worship together and go to school together .
When we 're together , we 're stronger . So I could not be any more honored to stand by Hillary 's side in this very important campaign .
AUDIENCE MEMBER : We love you both ! TIM KAINE :
Well , I 've spent most of my life in public service because I believe in doing everything I can to make a positive difference in people 's lives , and I can see a lot of you out there who feel exactly the same way exactly the same way .
I 'm one of only 20 people in American history to serve as a mayor , a governor , and a United States senator .
So I have been able to see how government works and how sometimes it doesn't , from just about every perspective , and I 've always believed that however you serve , what matters is whether you actually deliver results for people .
And that 's been my goal that 's been my goal in every position I 've ever held .
Now , I know for a lot of you , this might be the first time you 're hearing me speak , and hey , let me be honest , for many of you , this is the first time you 've even heard my name .
But that 's okay , because I 'm excited for us to get to know one another .
So today , I thought I might tell you a little bit about me and where I come from .
Vice president was never a job I thought about growing up in Kansas .
Like a lot of people in Kansas City , my parents weren't that into politics church , the Kansas City Royals , that 's the kind of thing that we spent time talking about .
They had too much else going on . My dad ran a union-organized ironworking shop in the stockyards of Kansas City .
And my mom , in addition to all the challenges of my two brothers and me , she was my dad 's best saleswoman .
That ironworking business was tough . It 's the kind of job where you can't cut corners ; if you 're not careful , you can make one mistake and ruin an awful lot of work in an instant .
I learned that working in my dad 's shop . My two brothers and I , we all pitched in .
Sometimes we were scheduled to pitch in and sometimes dad would just shake us in the morning and say ,
I got an order to get out and I really need you guys today .
I remember once , the last day of summer vacation , I was so looking forward to sleeping in , and then I felt that hand on my shoulder at about 6:00
I 've really got to have your help to get an order out today .
But that 's what families do . We would go there early , especially in the summer , to try to get the work done before the day got hot .
That 's what families do . That 's what families do .
My parents , Al and Kathy , and they 're alive and healthy , and they 're happy today 81 years old , alive , healthy and happy .
They taught me early lessons that have guided my life : the importance of hard work , of faith and kindness , of following your dreams .
My mom once told me and I 'll say this , she wasn't much of a lecturer , she just kind of liked to live and then we were supposed to follow the example but she once told me this : Tim , you have to decide whether you want to be right or you want to do right .
If you want to be right , go ahead and be a pessimist .
But if you want to do right , be an optimist .
And folks , I 've been an optimist ever since .
I went to a Jesuit boys ' school , Rockhurst High School in Kansas City .
And alright , some Jesuits in the house . I like that , I like that .
The motto of my school , this boys ' school , was ,
Men for others , and that was the that was what we were taught .
And that 's where my faith , which had been important to me because of my parents ' example , really grew into something more viable .
It became like my North Star , the organizing principle for what I wanted to do even as a young man because of these great teachers I had and because of my parents ' example , I knew that I wanted to do something to devote myself to social justice .
And that 's why , after racing through the University of Missouri in three years and starting at Harvard Law School , I decided to take a year off from school to volunteer with Jesuit missionaries in Honduras .
Hay hondureos aqu ? Hay algunos hondureos aqu ? Okay , un poquito , s .
Well , when I got to Honduras , it turned out that my recently acquired knowledge of constitutional law was pretty useless .
But the experience of working in my dad 's ironworking shop was actually kind of helpful .
So I taught teenagers the basics of carpentry and welding , and they helped me learn Spanish .
And I tell you , my time in Honduras changed my life in so many ways .
Aprend los valores de mi pueblo : fe , familia y trabajo .
Fe , familia y trabajo . Los mismos valores de la comunidad latina aqu en nuestro pas , ?
And here 's something that really stuck with me . I got a firsthand look at a system
this was 1980 and ' 81 a dictatorship where a few folks at the top had all the power , and everybody else got left behind .
And it convinced me that we 've got to advance opportunity and equality for everybody , no matter where they come from , how much money they have , what they look like , what accent they have , or who they love .
And in 1970 , a Republican governor of Virginia , Linwood Holton , believed exactly the same thing .
He integrated Virginia 's public schools after the state had fought for 16 years after Brown v . Board to keep them segregated .
Now , in 1970 in Virginia , that took political courage .
And then he and his wife went even further . They enrolled their own kids , including their daughter Anne , in integrated schools , and it sent a strong signal to the people of Virginia that their governor wasn't going to back down , wasn't going to take half steps , or wasn't going to make rules for others that he wouldn't follow for himself .
So many years later , that young girl Anne went to Princeton , went to Harvard Law School , guided by her experience as a youngster in the first generation of integrated Virginia schools , and one day in a study group she met this kind of nerdy guy who had been off teaching kids in Honduras .
Anne and I got married 32 years ago at St. Elizabeth 's Catholic Church in the Highland Park neighborhood of Richmond , Virginia .
That is the parish that we still belong today . Hey , Saint E 's folks , I hope you 're watching .
We will be there at 9 a.m. tomorrow . Marrying Anne was and remains the best decision of my life .
And it am I right ? Am I right ?
And it turns out she actually learned negotiation a lot better than I did in law school , which is how a Kansas City kid ended up in Virginia .
So Anne and I settled down , we started a family , and we sent out kids
we sent our kids to those same public schools that her father had opened up to everybody including one school that I helped build when I was mayor that our school board named the Linwood Holton Elementary School .
How cool was it to see our three kids head out the door with their backpacks on to walk to a neighborhood school named after their Civil Rights hero grandfather .
Lin 's example helped inspire me to work as a civil rights lawyer representing people who had been turned away from housing either because of the color of their skin or because they were an American with a disability .
And this was my civil rights work for 17 years .
I brought dozens of lawsuits when I was in private practice battling banks , landlords , real estate firms , insurance companies , and even local governments that had treated people unfairly .
In 1998 I won a historic verdict against a national insurance company because they had been redlining minority neighborhoods , treating them unfairly in the issuance of homeowners insurance .
At the time I won that case it was the biggest jury verdict ever in a civil rights case in American history .
I like to fight for right . I like to fight for right .
And I found myself going to city council meetings in Richmond to raise the issues that I was dealing with every day on behalf of my clients , but I was frustrated at the division and infighting .
So in 1994 I did something that seemed even crazier than what I 'm doing now .
I decided to run for local office . Man , I was so scared the day I announced , but I wanted to help my city and my community .
I knocked on every door in my district . I won my first race beating an incumbent by 94 votes the first of many nail-biters and squeakers I 've had since then .
And as I 've often said , if I 'm good at anything in public life , it 's good because I started at the local level listening to people , learning about their lives , and trying to find consensus to solve problems .
In the years that followed I became mayor of Richmond .
I was elected lieutenant governor of Virginia . And in 2006 I became the 70th governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia .
When we moved when we moved into the governor 's mansion after the inauguration , my wife became the only person who had ever lived there first as a child and then as a an adult .
We had to make tough decisions when I was in office because it was the deepest recession since the 1930s .
But that didn't stop us from expanding early childhood education , from building more classrooms and facilities on our college campuses so more could go to school , because we knew that education was the key to everything we wanted to achieve as a state and it 's the key to everything we want to achieve as a nation .
We invested in open space preservation and cleaning up the Chesapeake Bay because our kids and grandkids deserve to enjoy the beautiful commonwealth that we love , just like you love the beauty of your Sunshine state .
And we achieved national recognition for our work in tough times .
When I was governor of Virginia , best-managed state in America , best state for a child to have a successful life , best state for business , one of the lowest employment rates , one of the highest bond ratings , one of the highest family incomes .
We did that during tough times . And so today I am proud to carry that work forward as a Virginia senator serving on the Armed Services , Foreign Relations , and Budget Committees .
They actually just added me to the Aging Committee , too .
I don't know why they would have done that , would have done that .
I 'm proud to support my wife 's public service .
She has been a legal aid lawyer , juvenile court judge , foster care reformer ; now she 's Secretary of Education for the Commonwealth of Virginia .
And Anne and I are both so proud of our great commonwealth and of our great nation .
And isn't it great already ? I mean , isn't it great already ?
What a great country . As I look back over these experiences , what I 've learned is that God has created a rich and beautiful tapestry in this country .
It is a rainbow of cultural diversity that embraces all people regardless of their race or economic status , regardless of their religion or their gender , regardless of their sexual orientation or where they 're from .
We 've got this beautiful country that should be a country of welcome , that should be a country of inclusion , and I know that that is a fundamental value that Hillary Clinton shares .
Soy catlico , soy catlico . I 'm a Catholic .
And Hillary is a Methodist , but I tell you , her creed is the same as mine :
Do all the good you can . ' Pretty simple .
Do all the good you can . Measure your life by the positive effect you can have on other people 's lives .
Be of service to one another . Now , that 's a notion that Americans of every faith tradition and every moral tradition believe in , and it 's a message that Hillary Clinton has taken to heart for her entire life , for her entire life .
Fighting for children and families , like when she was First Lady .
After she tried and a recalcitrant congress blocked her in the big advance that we needed on health care reform , she said you know what , I 'm not stopping ; if we can't get it all , can we pass a program to provide health insurance to 8 million more American children ?
And that 's what she did . And that 's what she did .
That 's who she fought for . Fighting for fighting for equal rights for African Americans , for Latinos , for people with disabilities , for LGBT Americans in the aftermath of the 9/11 attack , fighting tenaciously to make sure that 9/11 first responders in New York and other localities would get health benefits .
Now , there are an awful lot of people an awful lot of people who 've put their trust and their faith in Hillary , and she 's always and she 's always delivered for them , from working with the Children 's Defense Fund , to first lady of Arkansas , to first lady of the United States , to senator , to secretary of state , she has always delivered .
And and you know what ? Here 's something you can tell about a great leader : She not only delivers in the easy times or the simple times , she delivers in the tough times and she even delivers when she 's on the receiving end of one attack after another .
She never backs down . She never backs down . Hillary , whatever the drama , whatever the attack , whatever the situation , stays focused on what matters : helping people .
That 's what keeps her going . So here 's how Hillary and I are going to continue that work : with a strong , progressive agenda .
We 're going to make the American economy work for everybody , not just those at the top .
Not just those at the top . And we 'll do that by making the largest investment in good-paying jobs since World War II . We will make college debt-free for everybody .
We 'll rewrite the rules so that companies share their profits with workers rather than ship jobs overseas , and we 'll make sure that Wall Street corporations and the wealthy pay their fair share of taxes .
And while we 're on the subject of taxes , where are Donald Trump 's tax returns ?
Raise your hand if you think those returns would show that he 's paid his fair share of taxes .
Well , I don't see a lot of I don't see a lot of hands .
We 're going to fight for paid family leave , equal pay for women , and raising the minimum wage to a living wage to keep families together to keep families together and to bring them out of the shadows .
In our administration in the first 100 days , we 'll put forward a comprehensive immigration reform package that includes a path to citizenship .
En el senado , hicimos eso hace casi tres aos , y estamos esperando todava para la casa de representantes tener un debate , un voto , en el sistema de inmigracin reforma , ?
Entonces , vamos a trabajar juntos en eso en los primero cien das de la administracin .
I will encourage you if you haven't done this , go to a naturalization service where people become U.S. citizens .
It is how many of you raise your hand if you have been a naturalized citizen , if you
Yeah . Well , thanks for choosing us . Thanks for choosing us .
If you haven't been to one of those services , it 's going to be one of the most powerful things you 'll ever see .
Often , after the oath is taken , there 's an open mike and people get to just walk up and say ,
Here 's why I decided that I wanted to become a citizen of the United States , ' and it will just bring tears to your eyes and a smile to your face when you hear what these people think about the greatness of the United States of America .
And when you go to one of these naturalization services and you see the people 's desire to join this great country , you will you 'll basically have this pretty amazing thought : Cualquier persona que ama tanto a los Estados Unidos merece estar aqu . Anybody who loves America this much deserves to be here deserves to be here .
Now , there 's one last part of Hillary 's plan that means a lot to me personally that kind of emotional for me , and I bet it 's emotional for you : how to stem the epidemic of gun violence that kills 33,000 Americans every year .
As governor during one of the most horrible shootings in America 's history , this issue is very close to my heart , very close to my heart .
And I know that many of you here feel exactly the same way after that tragic shooting in Orlando in June .
We can do better , folks . We can do better .
It was in April of 2007 , about halfway through my time as governor
I had just arrived in Japan on a trade mission to bring jobs back to Virginia had checked into the hotel room , had fallen asleep when the knock came at my door and the head of my security detail said , Governor , you got to turn on the TV . We 're going to get on the phone .
There 's a horrible shooting underway at Virginia Tech , ' this wonderful college in Blacksburg , Virginia .
And as jetlagged as I was and just arrived , I said , Take me back to the airport .
I 'm getting the first plane home . ' It was 14 hours over ; it was 14 hours back .
And I walked onto that campus jetlagged and in the wrong time zone , but I knew that as a leader , even though I didn't have any magic words to say that would take away the horror of the tragedy , I had to bring comfort in some way to the families of those who had been killed , to the students and professors who had been injured , and also to the first responders who had been there to help them .
This April 16 , 2007 that was the worst day of my life .
It was the worst day of so many people 's lives , and for the parents and the loved ones of those kids and professors , that pain never goes away .
Precious 17-year-olds , a 70-plus Lithuanian-born Holocaust survivor who was a teacher , who could survive the Holocaust , who could survive the Soviet takeover of his country , but who fell victim to gun violence because he blocked the door and told his students to climb out the window as his body was being riddled with bullets .
Survive the Holocaust , survive the Soviet takeover of your country , and fall victim in Blacksburg , Virginia to the horror of American gun violence ?
So when the vast majority of Americans , and even a majority of NRA members , agree that we have to adopt commonsense gun safety measures , Hillary and I will not rest will not rest .
We will not rest until we will not rest .
We won't rest we won't rest until we get universal background checks and close loopholes that put guns in the hands of criminals , terrorists , and dangerous people who should not have them .
It 's so easy . The American public wants it , gun owners want it , the NRA members want it .
We will not rest . Now , folks , I know the NRA . Their headquartered in my state , in Virginia .
They campaigned against me in every statewide race that I 've ever run , but I 've never lost an election .
I 've never lost an election . I don't mind powerful groups campaigning against me .
That just is like an extra cup of coffee to me , folks .
It just gets me more excited . I 'm 8 and 0 and I promise you I 'm not about to let that change , especially when Donald Trump stands in the way of progress on every single one of these issues that Hillary has laid out as core to her campaign , and many , many more .
So now I 'm going to wrap this up with three easy questions .
We 're at a university ; I can give you a test , right ?
I can give a test . These are three questions to ask yourselves .
One , do you want a you 're fired ' president or a you 're hired ' president ?
Of course , you want a you 're hired ' president .
Donald Trump is the you 're fired ' guy .
That 's what he 's known for , and when this whole campaign is done and everybody 's forgotten it , the one thing they will remember about Donald Trump is ,
You 're fired!' Bankrupting companies . Shipping jobs overseas . Stiffing contractors .
Being against federal minimum wage . Being against equal pay for equal work .
He 's the you 're fired ' guy . Hey , we 've got a you 're hired ' president a you 're hired ' president !
Let 's do debt-free college so people can have skills .
Let 's build bridges and roads and airports and ports so people can have jobs .
Let 's go for equal pay . Let 's raise the minimum wage .
Let 's bring back the dignity and respect of work .
A you 're hired ' president . Alright , you 're one for one .
Question two : Do you want a trash-talking president or a bridge-building president ?
AUDIENCE : Bridge-building president ! TIM KAINE : Of course you do .
Donald Trump trash talks folks with disabilities , trash talks trash talks Mexican Americans and Latinos , whether they 're new immigrants or governors or federal judges , trash talks women , trash talks our allies , calls the military a disaster .
Oh , you 're right , he doesn't trash talk everybody he likes Vladimir Putin .
You 're right . Let 's get that straight . But this is a bridge-builder president .
As a member of the Armed Services Committee , built great ties with our military and military families .
As a Secretary of State , made history building our relationships around the world and putting central to U.S. foreign policy the treatment of women and children around the world .
She 's a bridge-builder , and that 's what we need .
And last alright , Florida International , you 're two for two , so here 's number three .
Do you want a me first ' president or a kids and families first ' president ?
AUDIENCE : Kids and families ! TIM KAINE : Of course .
With Donald Trump it 's , Me first . I 'm not showing you my tax returns .
I 'm going to run a university that will take people 's money and rip them off . '
Donald Trump was in Britain when they cast the Brexit vote to leave the EU , and as the British pound , their unit of currency , was getting pummeled , he said ,
Hey , this could be good news for my golf course . '
Me first . ' But we 've got a kids and families first ' president who from her earliest days has been and I 'll tell you something .
I 'm going to give you a secret about those of us in politics .
If you want to try to judge the character of somebody in politics , I 'll tell you how to do it .
It 's really simple . Look at their life and see if they have a passion in their life that they had long before they got into politics , a passion that 's not about themselves , a passion that 's about somebody else .
And then see if they have held onto that passion through thick or thin , in good times or bad , whether winning elections or losing elections , come hell or high water .
Look to see if they have a passion that 's about somebody else , and look to see whether they 've held onto it all the time .
And that is character , and that is our kids and families first
Hillary Clinton . All right . When I was a kid growing up , my favorite President was another Kansas City guy , Harry Truman .
Great Democratic President . Great Democratic President . And let me tell you something that Harry Truman said that could have been written five minutes ago .
He said it in the late 1940s , and it 's so well put .
America was not built on fear . America was built on courage , on imagination , and an unbeatable determination to do the job at hand .
Let me tell you that one again . That 's so good .
America was not built on fear . America was not built on fear .
It was built on courage , on imagination , and an unbeatable determination to do the job at hand .
Friends , Hillary Clinton Hillary Clinton is filled with that courage , that imagination , and that unbeatable determination .
And that 's why we trust her to fight for all Americans .
That 's why I 'm with her . That 's why I 'm with her .
Are you with her ? That 's why we 're with her .
That 's why we 're with her . These are tough times for many in our country , but we 're tough people .
And that 's something else I learned from my folks :
Tough times don't last , but tough people do . And they don't come any tougher or any more compassionate than Hillary Clinton .
So let 's go make history and elect Hillary Clinton the 45th president of the United States !
Thank you . Thank you so much . Thank you .
Thank you all so much . Thank you . Thank you .
Thank you all very , very much . Thank you for that amazing welcome .
Thank you all for the great convention that we 've had .
And , Chelsea , thank you . I am so proud to be your mother and so proud of the woman you 've become .
Thank you for bringing Marc into our family and Charlotte and Aidan into the world .
And , Bill , that conversation we started in the law library 45 years ago , it is still going strong .
That conversation has lasted through good times that filled us with joy and hard times that tested us .
And I 've even gotten a few words in along the way .
On Tuesday night , I was so happy to see that my explainer-in-chief is still on the job .
( Applause . ) I 'm also grateful to the rest of my family and to the friends of a lifetime .
For all of you whose hard work brought us here tonight and to those of you who joined this campaign this week , thank you .
What a remarkable week it 's been . We heard the man from Hope , Bill Clinton ; and the man of hope , Barack Obama .
America is stronger because of President Obama 's leadership , and I am better because of his friendship .
We heard from our terrific Vice President , the one and only Joe Biden .
He spoke from his big heart about our party 's commitment to working people as only he can do .
And First Lady Michelle Obama reminded us that our children are watching and the president we elect is going to be their president , too .
And for those of you out there who are just getting to know Tim Kaine , you you will soon understand why the people of Virginia keep promoting him from city council and mayor , to governor , and now Senator .
And he will make our whole country proud as our vice president .
And I want to thank Bernie Sanders . Bernie . Bernie , your campaign inspired millions of Americans , particularly the young people who threw their hearts and souls into our primary .
You put economic and social justice issues front and center , where they belong .
And to all of your supporters here and around the country , I want you to know I have heard you .
Your cause is our cause . Our country needs your ideas , energy , and passion .
That is the only way we can turn our progressive platform into real change for America .
We wrote it together . Now let 's go out and make it happen together .
My friends , we 've come to Philadelphia , the birthplace of our nation , because what happened in this city 240 years ago still has something to teach us today .
We all know the story , but we usually focus on how it turned out , and not enough on how close that story came to never being written at all .
When representatives from 13 unruly colonies met just down the road from here , some wanted to stick with the king , and some wanted to stick it to the king .
The revolution hung in the balance . Then somehow they began listening to each other , compromising , finding common purpose .
And by the time they left Philadelphia , they had begun to see themselves as one nation .
That 's what made it possible to stand up to a king .
That took courage . They had courage . Our founders embraced the enduring truth that we are stronger together .
Now America is once again at a moment of reckoning .
Powerful forces are threatening to pull us apart . Bonds of trust and respect are fraying .
And just as with our founders , there are no guarantees .
It truly is up to us . We have to decide whether we will all work together so we can all rise together .
Our country 's motto is e pluribus unum : out of many , we are one .
Will we stay true to that motto ? Well , we heard Donald Trump 's answer last week at his convention .
He wants to divide us from the rest of the world and from each other .
He 's betting that the perils of today 's world will blind us to its unlimited promise .
He 's taken the Republican Party a long way from Morning in America to Midnight in America .
He wants us to fear the future and fear each other .
Well , a great Democratic President , Franklin Delano Roosevelt , came up with the perfect rebuke to Trump more than eighty years ago , during a much more perilous time :
The only thing we have to fear is fear itself .
Now we are clear-eyed about what our country is up against , but we are not afraid .
We will rise to the challenge , just as we always have .
We will not build a wall . Instead , we will build an economy where everyone who wants a good job can get one .
And we 'll build a path to citizenship for millions of immigrants who are already contributing to our economy .
We will not ban a religion . We will work with all Americans and our allies to fight and defeat terrorism .
Yet , we know there is a lot to do .
Too many people haven't had a pay raise since the crash .
There 's too much inequality , too little social mobility , too much paralysis in Washington , too many threats at home and abroad .
But just look for a minute at the strengths we bring as Americans to meet these challenges .
We have the most dynamic and diverse people in the world .
We have the most tolerant and generous young people we 've ever had .
We have the most powerful military , the most innovative entrepreneurs , the most enduring values
freedom and equality , justice and opportunity . We should be so proud that those words are associated with us .
I have to tell you , as your Secretary of State , I went to 112 countries .
When people hear those words , they hear America . So don't let anyone tell you that our country is weak .
We 're not . Don't let anyone tell you we don't have what it takes .
We do . And most of all , don't believe anyone who says , I alone can fix it .
Yes . Those were actually Donald Trump 's words in Cleveland .
And they should set off alarm bells for all of us .
Really ? I alone can fix it ? Isn't he forgetting troops on the front lines , police officers and firefighters who run toward danger , doctors and nurses who care for us ?
Teachers who change lives , entrepreneurs who see possibilities in every problem , mothers who lost children to violence and are building a movement to keep other kids safe ?
He 's forgetting every last one of us . Americans don't say ,
I alone fix can it . We say , We 'll fix it together .
And remember . Remember . Our founders fought a revolution and wrote a Constitution so America would never be a nation where one person had all the power .
240 years later , we still put our faith in each other .
Look at what happened in Dallas . After the assassinations of five brave police officers , Police Chief David Brown asked the community to support his force , maybe even join them .
And do you know how the community responded ? Nearly 500 people applied in just 12 days .
That 's how Americans answer when the call for help goes out .
20 years ago , I wrote a book called It Takes a Village .
And a lot of people looked at the title and asked , what the heck do you mean by that ?
This is what I mean . None of us can raise a family , build a business , heal a community , or lift a country totally alone .
America needs every one of us to lend our energy , our talents , our ambition to making our nation better and stronger .
I believe that with all my heart . That 's why
Stronger Together is not just a lesson from our history , it 's not just a slogan for our campaign , it 's a guiding principle for the country we 've always been , and the future we 're going to build .
A country where the economy works for everyone , not just those at the top .
Where you can get a good job and send your kids to a good school no matter what ZIP Code you live in .
A country where all our children can dream , and those dreams are within reach .
Where families are strong , communities are safe , and , yes , where love trumps hate .
That 's the country we 're fighting for . That 's the future we 're working toward .
And so , my friends , it is with humility , determination , and boundless confidence in America 's promise that I accept your nomination for president of the United States .
Now , sometimes the people at this podium are new to the national stage .
As you know , I 'm not one of those people .
I 've been your first lady , served eight years as a senator from the great state of New York .
Then I represented all of you as Secretary of State .
But my job titles only tell you what I 've done .
They don't tell you why . The truth is , through all these years of public service , the service part has always come easier to me than the public part .
I get it that some people just don't know what to make of me .
So let me tell you . The family I 'm from , well , no one had their name on big buildings .
My families were builders of a different kind , builders in the way most American families are .
They used whatever tools they had , whatever God gave them , and whatever life in America provided , and built better lives and better futures for their kids .
My grandfather worked in the same Scranton lace mill for 50 years because he believed that if he gave everything he had , his children would have a better life than he did .
And he was right . My dad , Hugh , made it to college .
He played football at Penn State and enlisted in the Navy after Pearl Harbor .
When the war was over he started his own small business , printing fabric for draperies .
I remember watching him stand for hours over silkscreens . He wanted to give my brothers and me opportunities he never had , and he did .
My mother , Dorothy , was abandoned by her parents as a young girl .
She ended up on her own at 14 , working as a housemaid .
She was saved by the kindness of others . Her first grade teacher saw she had nothing to eat at lunch , and brought extra food to share the entire year .
The lesson she passed on to me years later stuck with me : No one gets through life alone .
We have to look out for each other and lift each other up .
And she made sure I learned the words from our Methodist faith :
Do all the good you can , for all the people you can , in all the ways you can , as long as ever you can .
So I went to work for the Children 's Defense Fund , going door to door in New Bedford , Massachusetts on behalf of children with disabilities who were denied the chance to go to school .
Remember meeting a young girl in a wheelchair on the small back porch of her house .
She told me how badly she wanted to go to school .
It just didn't seem possible in those days . And I couldn't stop thinking of my mother and what she 'd gone through as a child .
It became clear to me that simply caring is not enough .
To drive real progress , you have to change both hearts and laws .
You need both understanding and action . So we gathered facts .
We build a coalition . And our work helped convince Congress to ensure access to education for all students with disabilities .
It 's a big idea , isn't it ? Every kid with a disability has the right to go to school .
But how do you make an idea like that real ?
You do it step by step , year by year , sometimes even door by door .
My heart just swelled when I saw Anastasia Somoza representing millions of young people on this stage because we changed our law to make sure she got an education .
So it 's true . I sweat the details of policy , whether we 're talking about the exact level of lead in the drinking water in Flint , Michigan the number of mental health facilities in Iowa , or the cost of your prescription drugs .
Because it 's not just a detail if it 's your kid , if it 's your family .
It 's a big deal . And it should be a big deal to your president , too .
After the four days of this convention , you 've seen some of the people who 've inspired me , people who let me into their lives and became a part of mine , people like Ryan Moore and Lauren Manning .
They told their stories Tuesday night . I first met Ryan as a 7-year-old .
He was wearing a full body brace that must have weighed 40 pounds because I leaned over to lift him up .
Children like Ryan kept me going when our plan for universal health care failed , and kept me working with leaders of both parties to help create the Children 's Health Insurance Program that covers eight million kids in our country .
Lauren Manning , who stood here with such grace and power , was gravely injured on 9/11 .
It was the thought of her , and Debbie Stage .
John who you saw in the movie , and John Dolan and Joe Sweeney and all the victims and survivors , that kept me working as hard as I could in the Senate on behalf of 9/11 families and our first responders who got sick from their time at Ground Zero .
I was thinking of Lauren , Debbie , and all the others ten years later in the White House Situation Room , when President Obama made the courageous decision that finally brought Osama bin Laden to justice .
And in this campaign I 've met many more people who motivate me to keep fighting for change , and with your help , I will carry all of your voices and stories with me to the White House .
And you heard from Republicans and Independents who are supporting our campaign .
Well , I will be a president for Democrats , Republicans , Independents , for the struggling , the striving , the successful , for all those who vote for me and for those who don't .
For all Americans together . Tonight , we 've reached a milestone in our nation 's march toward a more perfect union : the first time that a major party has nominated a woman for president .
Standing here as my mother 's daughter , and my daughter 's mother , I 'm so happy this day has come .
I 'm happy for grandmothers and little girls and everyone in between .
I 'm happy for boys and men because when any barrier falls in America , it clears the way for everyone .
After all , when there are no ceilings , the sky 's the limit .
So let 's keep going until every one of the 161 million women and girls across America has the opportunity she deserves to have .
But even more important than the history we make tonight is the history we will write together in the years ahead .
Let 's begin with what we 're going to do to help working people in our country get ahead and stay ahead .
Now , I don't think President Obama and Vice President Biden get the credit they deserve for saving us from the worst economic crisis of our lifetimes .
Our economy is so much stronger than when they took office .
Nearly 15 million new private sector jobs . Twenty million more Americans with health insurance .
And an auto industry that just had its best year ever .
Now , that 's real progress . But none of us can be satisfied with the status quo .
Not by a long shot . We 're still facing deep-seated problems that developed long before the recession and have stayed with us through the recovery .
I 've gone around the country talking to working families .
And I 've heard from many who feel like the economy sure isn't working for them .
Some of you are frustrated even furious . And you know what ?
You 're right . It 's not yet working the way it should .
Americans are willing to work and work hard . But right now , an awful lot of people feel there is less and less respect for the work they do .
And less respect for them , period . Democrats , we are the party of working people .
But we haven't done a good enough job showing we get what you 're going through , and we 're going to do something to help .
So tonight I want to tell you how we will empower Americans to live better lives .
My primary mission as president will be to create more opportunity and more good jobs with rising wages right here in the United States .
From my first day in office to my last . Especially in places that for too long have been left out and left behind .
From our inner cities to our small towns , from Indian country to coal country .
From communities ravaged by addiction to regions hollowed out by plant closures .
And here 's what I believe . I believe America thrives when the middle class thrives .
I believe our economy isn't working the way it should because our democracy isn't working the way it should .
That 's why we need to appoint Supreme Court justices who will get money out of politics and expand voting rights , not restrict them .
And if necessary , we will pass a constitutional amendment to overturn Citizens United .
I believe American corporations that have gotten so much from our country should be just as patriotic in return .
Many of them are , but too many aren't . It 's wrong to take tax breaks with one hand and give out pink slips with the other .
And I believe Wall Street can never , ever be allowed to wreck Main Street again .
And I believe in science . I believe that climate change is real and that we can save our planet while creating millions of good-paying clean energy jobs .
I believe that when we have millions of hardworking immigrants contributing to our economy , it would be self-defeating and inhumane to try to kick them out .
Comprehensive immigration reform will grow our economy and keep families together and it 's the right thing to do .
So whatever party you belong to , or if you belong to no party at all , if you share these beliefs , this is your campaign .
If you believe that companies should share profits , not pad executive bonuses , join us .
If you believe the minimum wage should be a living wage , and no one working full-time should have to raise their children in poverty , join us .
If you believe that every man , woman , and child in America has the right to affordable health care , join us !
If you believe that we should say no to unfair trade deals ; that we should stand up to China ; that we should support our steelworkers and autoworkers and homegrown manufacturers , then join us .
If you believe we should expand Social Security and protect a woman 's right to make her own heath care decisions , then join us .
And yes , yes , if you believe that your working mother , wife , sister , or daughter deserves equal pay join us .
That 's how we 're going to make sure this economy works for everyone , not just those at the top .
Now , you didn't hear any of this , did you , from Donald Trump at his convention .
He spoke for 70-odd minutes and I do mean odd .
And he offered zero solutions . But we already know he doesn't believe these things .
No wonder he doesn't like talking about his plans . You might have noticed , I love talking about mine .
In my first 100 days , we will work with both parties to pass the biggest investment in new , good-paying jobs since World War II . Jobs in manufacturing , clean energy , technology and innovation , small business , and infrastructure .
If we invest in infrastructure now , we 'll not only create jobs today , but lay the foundation for the jobs of the future .
And we will also transform the way we prepare our young people for those jobs .
Bernie Sanders and I will work together to make college tuition-free for the middle class and debt-free for all .
We will also we will also liberate millions of people who already have student debt .
It 's just not right that Donald Trump can ignore his debts , and students and families can't refinance their debts .
And something we don't say often enough : Sure , college is crucial , but a four-year degree should not be the only path to a good job .
We will help more people learn a skill or practice a trade and make a good living doing it .
We will give small businesses , like my dad 's , a boost , make it easier to get credit .
Way too many dreams die in the parking lots of banks .
In America , if you can dream it , you should be able to build it .
And we will help you balance family and work . And you know what , if fighting for affordable child care and paid family leave is playing the woman card , then deal me in .
Now now , here 's the other thing . Now , we 're not only going to make all of these investments .
We 're going to pay for every single one of them .
And here 's how . Wall Street , corporations , and the super-rich are going to start paying their fair share of taxes .
This is this is not because we resent success , but when more than 90 percent of the gains have gone to the top 1 percent , that 's where the money is .
And we are going to follow the money . And if companies take tax breaks and then ship jobs overseas , we 'll make them pay us back .
And we 'll put that money to work where it belongs : creating jobs here at home .
Now , I imagine that some of you are sitting at home thinking , well , that all sounds pretty good , but how are you going to get it done ?
How are you going to break through the gridlock in Washington ?
Well , look at my record . I 've worked across the aisle to pass laws and treaties and to launch new programs that help millions of people .
And if you give me the chance , that 's exactly what I 'll do as President .
But then but then I also imagine people are thinking out there , but Trump , he 's a businessman .
He must know something about the economy . Well , let 's take a closer look , shall we ?
In Atlantic City , 60 miles from here , you will find contractors and small businesses who lost everything because Donald Trump refused to pay his bills .
Now , remember what the President said last night . Don't boo .
Vote . But think of this . People who did the work and needed the money , not because he couldn't pay them , but because he wouldn't pay them , he just stiffed them .
And you know that sales pitch he 's making to be president : put your faith in him , and you 'll win big ?
That 's the same sales pitch he made to all those small businesses .
Then Trump walked away and left working people holding the bag .
He also talks a big game about putting America first .
Well , please explain what part of America First leads him to make Trump ties in China , not Colorado ; Trump suits in Mexico , not Michigan ; Trump furniture in Turkey , not Ohio ; Trump picture frames in India , not Wisconsin .
Donald Trump says he wants to make America great again .
Well , he could start by actually making things in America again .
Now , the choice we face in this election is just as stark when it comes to our national security .
Anyone anyone reading the news can see the threats and turbulence we face .
From Baghdad and Kabul , to Nice and Paris and Brussels , from San Bernardino to Orlando , we 're dealing with determined enemies that must be defeated .
So it 's no wonder that people are anxious and looking for reassurance , looking for steady leadership , wanting a leader who understands we are stronger when we work with our allies around the world and care for our veterans here at home .
Keeping our nation safe and honoring the people who do that work will be my highest priority .
I 'm proud that we put a lid on Iran 's nuclear program without firing a single shot .
Now we have to enforce it , and we must keep supporting Israel 's security .
I 'm proud that we shaped a global climate agreement .
Now we have to hold every country accountable to their commitments , including ourselves .
And I 'm proud to stand by our allies in NATO against any threat they face , including from Russia .
I 've laid out my strategy for defeating ISIS . We will strike their sanctuaries from the air and support local forces taking them out on the ground .
We will surge our intelligence so we detect and prevent attacks before they happen .
We will disrupt their efforts online to reach and radicalize young people in our country .
It won't be easy or quick , but make no mistake we will prevail .
Now Donald Trump Donald Trump says , and this is a quote ,
I know more about ISIS than the generals do .
No , Donald , you don't . He thinks he thinks he knows more than our military because he claimed our armed forces are a disaster .
Well , I 've had the privilege to work closely with our troops and our veterans for many years , including as a Senator on the Armed Services Committee .
And I know how wrong he is . Our military is a national treasure .
We entrust our commander-in-chief to make the hardest decisions our nation faces : decisions about war and peace , life and death .
A president should respect the men and women who risk their lives to serve our country , including including Captain Khan and the sons of Tim Kaine and Mike Pence , both Marines .
So just ask yourself : Do you really think Donald Trump has the temperament to be commander-in-chief ?
Donald Trump can't even handle the rough-and-tumble of a presidential campaign .
He loses his cool at the slightest provocation when he 's gotten a tough question from a reporter , when he 's challenged in a debate , when he sees a protestor at a rally .
Imagine , if you dare imagine , imagine him in the Oval Office facing a real crisis .
A man you can bait with a tweet is not a man we can trust with nuclear weapons .
I can't put it any better than Jackie Kennedy did after the Cuban Missile Crisis .
She said that what worried President Kennedy during that very dangerous time was that a war might be started not by big men with self-control and restraint , but by little men , the ones moved by fear and pride .
America 's strength doesn't come from lashing out . It relies on smarts , judgment , cool resolve , and the precise and strategic application of power .
And that 's the kind of commander-in-chief I pledge to be .
And if we 're serious about keeping our country safe , we also can't afford to have a president who 's in the pocket of the gun lobby .
I 'm not here to repeal the Second Amendment . I 'm not here to take away your guns .
I just don't want you to be shot by someone who shouldn't have a gun in the first place .
We will work tirelessly with responsible gun owners to pass common-sense reforms and keep guns out of the hands of criminals , terrorists , and all others who would do us harm .
For decades , people have said this issue was too hard to solve and the politics too hot to touch .
But I ask you : How can we just stand by and do nothing ?
You heard , you saw , family members of people killed by gun violence on this stage .
You heard , you saw family members of police officers killed in the line of duty because they were outgunned by criminals .
I refuse to believe we can't find common ground here .
We have to heal the divides in our country , not just on guns but on race , immigration , and more .
And that starts with listening , listening to each other , trying as best we can to walk in each other 's shoes .
So let 's put ourselves in the shoes of young black and Latino men and women who face the effects of systemic racism and are made to feel like their lives are disposable .
Let 's put ourselves in the shoes of police officers , kissing their kids and spouses goodbye every day and heading off to do a dangerous and necessary job .
We will reform our criminal justice system from end to end , and rebuild trust between law enforcement and the communities they serve .
And we will defend we will defend all our rights : civil rights , human rights , and voting rights ; women 's rights and workers ' rights ; LGBT rights and the rights of people with disabilities .
And we will stand up against mean and divisive rhetoric wherever it comes from .
For the past year , many people made the mistake of laughing off Donald Trump 's comments , excusing him as an entertainer just putting on a show .
They thought he couldn't possibly mean all the horrible things he says , like when he called women pigs or said that an American judge couldn't be fair because of his Mexican heritage , or when he mocks and mimics a reporter with a disability , or insults prisoners of war
like John McCain , a hero and a patriot who deserves our respect .
Now , at first , I admit , I couldn't believe he meant it , either .
It was just too hard to fathom , that someone who wants to lead our nation could say those things , could be like that .
But here 's the sad truth : There is no other Donald Trump .
This is it . And in the end , it comes down to what Donald Trump doesn't get : America is great because America is good .
So enough with the bigotry and the bombast . Donald Trump 's not offering real change .
He 's offering empty promises . And what are we offering ?
A bold agenda to improve the lives of people across our country to keep you safe , to get you good jobs , to give your kids the opportunities they deserve .
The choice is clear , my friends . Every generation of Americans has come together to make our country freer , fairer , and stronger .
None of us ever have or can do it alone .
I know that at a time when so much seems to be pulling us apart , it can be hard to imagine how we 'll ever pull together .
But I 'm here to tell you tonight progress is possible .
I know . I know because I 've seen it in the lives of people across America who get knocked down and get right back up .
And I know it from my own life . More than a few times , I 've had to pick myself up and get back in the game .
Like so much else in my life , I got this from my mother too .
She never let me back down from any challenge . When I tried to hide from a neighborhood bully , she literally blocked the door .
Go back out there , she said . And she was right .
You have to stand up to bullies . You have to keep working to make things better , even when the odds are long and the opposition is fierce .
We lost our mother a few years ago , but I miss her every day .
And I still hear her voice urging me to keep working , keep fighting for right , no matter what .
That 's what we need to do together as a nation .
And though we may not live to see the glory , as the song from the musical Hamilton goes , let us gladly join the fight .
Let our legacy be about planting seeds in a garden you never get to see .
That 's why we 're here , not just in this hall , but on this Earth .
The Founders showed us that , and so have many others since .
They were drawn together by love of country , and the selfless passion to build something better for all who follow .
That is the story of America . And we begin a new chapter tonight .
Yes , the world is watching what we do . Yes , America 's destiny is ours to choose .
So let 's be stronger together , my fellow Americans .
Let 's look to the future with courage and confidence .
Let 's build a better tomorrow for our beloved children and our beloved country .
And when we do , America will be greater than ever .
Thank you and may God bless you and the United States of America .
TIM KAINE : Hey , Philadelphia ! [ ]
Wow . Man , wow . I was tired after last night , but I 'm awake now .
Listen , what a warm welcome . Hello to Philadelphia .
I 'll tell you , we come from Virginia and we think we have this hospitality thing down pat , but Philadelphia really showed off this week .
So , some thank-yous . I want to thank my great friend and Senate colleague Bob Casey .
What a wonderful what a wonderful public servant . And we are so excited to have another great Pennsylvanian about to join us in the United States Senate , Katie McGinty .
Katie ! You have heard earlier today already from two of the people who were absolutely key to making this convention work like a charm , and that 's our Congressman Bob Brady and Mayor Jim Kenney .
Thank you , guys , for all your great work .
Governor Ed Rendell he and I share being mayors , governors and DNC chairs .
We surely have time we get to go right by purgatory and right to the golden gates because of what we 've done .
Ed Rendell great , great public servant . We have in the pre-program you 've already heard from Councilwoman Cherelle Parker and Reverend Bonnie Camarada and Bobby Hill and Josh Shapiro , so many great public servants broadly defined in this room .
It has been an incredible week , and I could not be prouder to be here in Philadelphia and accept the request of a spectacular public servant , Hillary Clinton , to accept my party 's nomination to be vice president .
Hillary ! Hillary ! Hillary ! I shared the other night at the convention how kind of weird I feel being here .
I mean , I just grew up in such a non-political household .
My dad ran this union-organized ironworker shop , and mom and dad are here somewhere in this room .
They 're 81 years old and we 're having a great time together .
And I don't know if there 's any Irish Americans here , but they 're standing with a buddy
they 're standing with a buddy from County Cork , Pdraig Fleming , who flew over to surprise me .
So , look , we 're here , a strong family , all of us .
We worked in my dad 's business , my mom and my brothers and me , and pitched in .
That 's what family businesses do . I know a lot of you come from that .
When family says , You 've got to help , ' you 've got to help and we like helping .
I learned a lot from working for my dad . I learned a lot from a Jesuit high school I went to that taught wow .
Jesuits aren't that big an applause line in every city , but I 'm glad I 'm glad to know in Philadelphia
I 'm glad to know in Philadelphia I bet there were a lot of Pope Francis Catholics here before there was a Pope Francis .
But those values of hard work and of faith were my guiding principles , and that 's one of the reasons that I developed such an admiration and friendship for Hillary Clinton , because those are the same values that have driven her
her growing up in a small business household , her growing up inspired by a Methodist youth pastor .
Those are her values , and she 's been living them fighting for kids and families , putting them first for her entire career
your entire career . In my own life , I took the lessons from my parents and I took the lessons from the Jesuits that I worked with as a missionary in Honduras and I basically decided to do what virtually all of you guys are doing , which is to measure what I do by how it helps somebody else .
Can you serve others ? Can you do good for others ?
It 's not about title . It 's not about money .
It 's not about prestige . It 's not about popularity .
It 's not about anything other than serving other people , and that 's the kind of candidate we have .
So we 're starting today this bus tour . Now , this is the part of the campaign I really like .
I mean , the big events are fun , but I don't like wearing a tie that much , so I 'd rather I 'd rather just go out and pound the pavement .
And so we 're starting a three-day bus tour today , and this is the first rally .
And then we 're going to go and it 's no accident this is the first rally .
And then we 're going to go across Pennsylvania and we 're going to go across Iowa , and Secretary Clinton is going to be laying out why she is going to be such a fantastic president a fantastic president .
We 're going to be drawing that contrast between Hillary Clinton 's plans for our country and Donald Trump 's empty promises and no plans for the country .
You know you know her plans . I mean , I don't know .
Is there anybody at Temple that likes the idea of debt-free college ?
I mean . Yeah . She has pledged in the first 100 days of the administration to make a massive investment in new jobs , education , work training , rebuilding our nation 's infrastructure , fighting the battles that she has fought time and time again .
And it 's not just about what she says . It 's that she 's delivered .
I know you watched last night as she talked about and as Chelsea talked about her battling to get health insurance for 8 million American kids when she was First Lady .
Now , don't you want don't you want a president who knows how to battle and get things done for regular people , who might not be able to get those things done without a great champion ?
Of course , you do . Of course , you do .
So that 's what we 'll do over the next couple of days .
We 'll talk about creating jobs . We 'll talk about raising wages .
We 'll talk about the leadership that America needs to play in the world , a leadership that 's got to be based on alliances and building bridges and just using the relationships we have to defeat forces of terrorism and forces of prejudice , forces of anti-Semitism .
We can do that when we work together around the world .
And , finally , and , finally and in some ways , this is the thing that matters the most to me as a former civil rights lawyer , that we want to make sure that we 've got a community of respect right ? or , as the civil rights leaders used to say , a beloved community , where people are not demeaned because of who they are , not dissed because they are somebody with a disability or they 're LGBT or they come from another country or their skin color is different or they speak a different language but embraced .
Hey , don't you guys in Pennsylvania call yourself a commonwealth , just like we in Virginia do , just like we in Virginia do ?
That 's different than saying you 're a state . Anybody who says we 're a commonwealth , what you are saying is the wealth we hold we hold in common .
It 's got to be about everybody . It 's got to be about bringing everybody together .
And those are Hillary Clinton 's values . Now , the last thing I 'll say before we bring up our champion and the main event is I 've noticed there 's a few differences between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump .
Now , let 's see . What 's today , Friday ?
I think I can well , I 'm going to try to boil it down .
You 've seen Trump basically pitch in a very dark and negative convention in Cleveland a very different view of this country .
Weren't you proud of how optimistic , upbeat , positive , pro-America the convention was here in the message of our candidate ?
Absolutely . Absolutely . Absolutely . The Republican convention was like a twisted and negative tour .
It wasn't a tour of this country . It was a journey through Donald Trump 's mind , and that is a very frightening place .
That is a very frightening place . When it comes to the economy we 're at a college .
We 're at a college . Can I ask you a question ?
In Hillary , we 've got a You 're hired ' president .
Would you rather have that or a You 're fired ' president ?
Absolutely . That 's not that hard . That 's not that hard .
In Hillary , you 've got a bridge builder . Would you rather have that or have a trash talker ?
A bridge builder , right ? A bridge builder . And in Hillary , you 've got that character from before she was ever in office that puts kids and families first .
This is really important . This is really important . If you want to know about trustworthiness and character of somebody in public life , look to see
AUDIENCE MEMBER : We trust Hillary . TIM KAINE :
All right . You got to the punchline . He got to the punchline .
He got to the punchline . I like you . I like you .
All right . All right . Now , look . If you want to know how you can view somebody in public life , look to see if they had a passion before they got in office and whether they have continued that passion consistently throughout their entire time .
And you know that Hillary Clinton , in good times and tough times , in victory and defeat , through hell or high water , in office or out of office , since she was a teenager has been putting kids and families first .
And you also know that Donald Trump has had a passion , too .
And that passion is Donald Trump , Donald Trump . So it 's kids first or me first .
But , look , I am so glad to be on this ticket .
It 's a history-making ticket . Anything I can do to help us succeed and anything I can do that will help this administration be a fantastic one from first day to last is going to be my humble honor to do .
So please give a great Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , American welcome to our next president , Hillary Clinton .
HILLARY CLINTON : Thank you ! Thank you all so much .
Thank you . Thank you very , very much . I have to begin by thanking our hosts , the people of Philadelphia .
You know a little something about history and about making history .
And I am so grateful to everyone in this city who pulled such a great convention together , who were so gracious , welcoming and hospitable , and I am thrilled that so many Americans from everywhere got a chance to see Philadelphia !
To see what 's in this great city . People kept coming back from going for walks , going to museums , going to other sites , telling me how much they were impressed .
And so I want to thank your mayor . Thank you , Mayor Kenney .
I want to thank your Congressman who tries to come home to Philadelphia everyday and I know why , because he loves this city : Bob Brady !
I am always happy to be here with someone who 's been a friend for Bill and me over so many years , an extraordinary public servant and advocate , former governor and mayor , Ed Rendell .
Now I , like Tim , I had the great pleasure of serving in the senate with senator Bob Casey , and I appreciated his tenacity , the attention to detail , the work he did for you every single day .
And so I want to thank Bob , and I want also to recognize who I hope will be his partner in the Senate come November , Katie McGinty .
And I hope the next Attorney General for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania , Josh Shapiro .
This has been such an invigorating , exciting week . As I said last night , we heard from the man from Hope , Bill Clinton .
And we heard from the man of hope , Barack Obama .
And I was so excited to introduce to America our partners .
It 's going to be fun to travel with both Tim and Anne because they are going to demonstrate to the country what the people of Virginia already know .
There are no better people to have in your corner than Tim Kaine and Anne Holton .
Now I don't know about you , but I stayed up really late last night .
It was just hard to go to sleep . Oh , thank you , thank you .
It was so exciting , but I have to tell you , it was also kind of overwhelming .
I take deeply and with great humility the responsibility that this campaign imposes on us .
There is no doubt in my mind that every election in our democracy is important in its own way , but I can't think of an election that is more important , certainly in my lifetime .
And it 's not so much that I 'm on the ticket , it is because of the stark choice that is posed to America in this election .
So when I did , when I did wake up this morning , thank you when I did start moving , and Bill and I started drinking our coffee , or asking that it be administered through an IV , we suddenly looked at each other and we realized , as of tomorrow , we have 100 days to make our case to America .
So what better place to kick off this campaign than right here in Philadelphia where it all started 240 years ago .
I believe with all my heart that our Founders came together to create one nation because they understood what we understand : we are stronger together !
And as we pointed out during our four great days of our convention , you heard something very different from the Republicans , didn't you ?
We might as well be talking about two different countries , or , as someone said to me , two different planets .
Donald Trump painted a picture , a negative , dark , divisive picture of a country in decline .
He insisted that America is weak , and he told us all , after laying out this very dark picture , that
I alone can fix it . ' Now , as I watched and heard that , it set off alarm bells because just think about what happened here 240 years ago .
Think about our Founders , coming together , a Declaration of Independence , writing a Constitution .
They set up our form of government , the longest lasting democracy in the history of the world .
And you know they did it because they knew they didn't want one person , one man to have all the power like a king .
And think about George Washington , our first president . After he served , he stepped down voluntarily .
People around him couldn't believe it , but he said no , this is an example we should set .
A democracy requires something from all of us , not just people we elect , but every single one of us .
And Washington set that example . And I don't know any Founder , no matter how strong they were , how smart they were who believed that only they could solve our problems , so and I 'll tell you something else they also expected a kind of raucous debate in America .
But at the end of the debate , we have to come together and get things done , don't we ?
So as Tim said , we are going to get on a bus as soon as we leave here and we 're going to drive through Pennsylvania into Ohio .
It 's kind for nostalgic for me , my dad was born in Scranton
, I spent every summer of my life up in northeast Pennsylvania .
My father , my brother went to Penn State , so I know , I know how beautiful this commonwealth is and how wonderful the people are .
But we 've got work to do . I 'm not satisfied with the status quo .
I 'm not telling you that everything is just peachy keen .
I 'm telling you , we 've made progress but we have work to do if we 're going to make sure that everybody is included .
And you know , I think that we 've got to have more good jobs , we 've got to raise wages , we 've got to tackle inequality .
We 've got to make this economy work for everyone , not just those at the top .
And if you listen really closely to the Republican Convention , you know that Donald Trump talked for 75 minutes and did not offer one solution .
In fact , his speech , his whole convention seemed more about insulting me instead of helping the American people .
So here 's what I 've said I will do .
And we 're going to get to work on the very first day , within the first 100 days of our administration we 're going to break through the gridlock in Washington and make the biggest investment in new , good-paying jobs since World War II . We 're going to do it in infrastructure , technology , clean energy , advanced manufacturing .
And I 'm also going to pay special attention to those parts of our country that have been left out and left behind .
From our inner cities to our small towns , from Indian Country to Coal Country .
From communities ravaged by addiction and places hollowed out by plant closures .
Anybody willing to work in America should be able to find a job to get ahead and stay ahead .
That 's my goal . So on our bus tour we 're going to be visiting a few places where people are making things .
I find it highly amusing that Donald Trump talks about
Make America Great Again . ' He doesn't make a thing in America except bankruptcies .
So there 's a lot to be done my friends , and I 'm excited .
I 'm excited to have Tim and Anne as part of this team , and I 'm excited to have the 42nd President of the United States as part of this team .
The four of us are going to barnstorm the country because , as a very smart president who just so happens to be here today once said ,
There is nothing wrong with America that can't be cured by what 's right with America . '
So now , we had a great convention , but we 've got to go out and we 've got to fight for our vision of the future .
And I can't do it alone . I need each and every one of you , here 's what I ask you to do .
Please , join us . Go to hillaryclinton.com or text JOIN , J-O-I-N to 47246 to be part of this campaign .
And we are hiring organizers here in Pennsylvania and across the country .
And between now and election day , we are going to register 3 million more people .
And we 're not just going to register them , we 're going to get them to commit to vote .
We feel deeply the responsibility for continuing the work that started down the road from here 240 years ago .
Now , nobody who looks like me was thought to be possible to run for president back then .
No one who looked like Barack Obama was thought to be possible .
But contrary to Donald Trump , I believe every time we knock down a barrier in America , it liberates everyone in America .
I have to say , last night , after the end of our convention , I knew that every parent in this country could look at their son or their daughter and now say the very same thing : you too could be President of the United States .
Thank you all , God bless you ! TIM KAINE :
[ ] great to be here . And I know we 've got employees from Rodon , K'NEX . We 've got students .
And raise your hand . I think we have a lot of teachers here .
Raise your hand if you 're a teacher . All right .
Very , very important . To begin , let me just say with Governor Wolf standing right behind me Philadelphia and Pennsylvania just knocked it out of the park .
What a powerful combination . [ ] I mean , I like to brag in Virginia about Southern hospitality , but apparently there can be hospitality just about everywhere .
And you guys did such a good job . And we really appreciate it .
My wife , Anne , and I are now on the trail , excited to be part of this team .
And just a couple of thoughts before I introduce our next president , thoughts about manufacturing , thoughts about education , and thoughts about pride .
Manufacturing . This brings back memories coming here and seeing some machinery that is really familiar to me and then some machinery that is not so familiar .
I grew up in a household where my dad ran a business called Iron Crafters Inc . in the stockyards of Kansas City .
And it was an ironworking and welding shop . The first room we walked into , a lot of presses , punches , lathes looked exactly like the ones that I grew up working on , with his five or six employees and my two brothers and me and my mom basically all making that business work .
That 's what small businesses do . So you will hear people say when it comes to manufacturing in America manufacturing is dead , but that is not the case .
And it 's often these family businesses , just like Rodon K'NEX , that are keeping it alive that then are revitalizing it and bringing a renaissance so that we can do it in the 21st Century .
And so we honor that in you , and that 's why we wanted to come by on sort of our first road stop on a two-day bus tour in Pennsylvania and Ohio to talk about jobs .
We 've got to bring manufacturing back . And the way we do it is using the examples of successful companies , like Rodon K'NEX .
Second , education . We 've got educators here . And we know how important that is .
I 'll tell you something that I really liked last night .
There were many moments in Secretary Clinton 's speech that I really liked .
One of the ones was when she was talking about the need for a great workforce .
She , as you know , has laid out a pretty important plan for families to enable us to educate our children and to try to guarantee them that they would go through college debt-free .
Now , that would be a really , really big thing we could do for our kids .
But you may have noticed that she also kind of said and really underlined it in what she said that we shouldn't just perpetuate sort of the myth that it 's only about college education .
It 's got to be about apprenticeships . It 's got to be about technical skills and trades and careers .
Often jobs in these areas are the most likely jobs not to ever be outsourced .
And so we have to have an education system that inculcates in the students an appreciation for manufacturing and trades .
And that 's another reason , Mike , to you and the whole team here , Rodon K'NEX gets it .
The products that you produce capture and spark that imagination in students , but you also work with educators to advance that cause .
Hillary Clinton is a big believer that we 've got to define educational success in a very broad way so that we can train and inspire the next generation of neighbors , just like Rodon K'NEXdoes .
Now , the third thing is pride . This company has a pride story .
This company had 50 percent , maybe more than 50 percent , of its product being produced outside of the United States , manufactured outside of the United States , before 2009 .
And when a lot of companies ; in fact , including companies that are owned by the Republican nominee , Donald Trump , are pushing more and more jobs overseas and when there are policies , even tax policies , in the country that give you a benefit if you push jobs overseas , Rodon K'NEX was fighting against that trend , fighting to make it in America by proud American workers with high-quality products that nobody in the rest of the world can match .
This is a pride story . And that is one of the reasons we 're here , too .
You should be proud of yourselves just like Hillary . Hillary Clinton understands that pride .
She feels that pride . She knows that the years , especially since 2008 , with the greatest meltdown of the economy since the 1930s , have imposed an awful lot of pain on an awful lot of people and an awful lot of industries and an awful lot of communities .
The American economy has climbed back up the ladder to climb out of it , but we have a long way to go .
And she has laid out very clearly a set of strategies from the education strategies I talked about earlier to important strategies to make sure that those who are working are treated fairly in their benefits and their wages and also to investments to grow the economy , whether those be investments in innovation and research or investments in infrastructure to build the society that we want .
Hillary Clinton is proud to be here , and so am I . Hillary Clinton is proud of the American worker and just wants to make sure that we have policies that reward work as much as we say we 're proud of the workers .
And that 's one of the reasons why I am just so honored to be part of this ticket .
So will you please do this with me : give a great Pennsylvania welcome to a history-making person who is going to lead us [ ] the 45th president of the United States , Hillary Rodham Clinton .
HILLARY CLINTON : Thank you so much . Wow .
I am I am very honored and excited about being here with all of you .
I am grateful to be here with your United States Senator , Bob Casey , someone whom I 've known a long time and had the privilege of working with in the Senate , as Tim Kaine has had .
I also am delighted to be here with Governor Tom Wolf , somebody who knows about family-owned businesses and how important it is that we keep them alive and thriving .
And I also want to thank Michael , Michael Araten , for describing about what this company does , why it 's important , and the goals and the values that undergird it .
So , in addition to Michael , I also want to recognize Joel Glickman and Bob Glickman , Garrett Talley , all of the families and employees associated with this company .
Now , we could have come a lot of different places because we started off in Philadelphia after the end of the convention last night , but we wanted to drive through Pennsylvania , a state I 've spent a lot of time in because my father was born in Scranton and we used to grow to Scranton every single summer and a lot of Christmases from our home outside of Chicago .
So I 've been all over Pennsylvania . And my dad played football at Penn State .
My brother played football at Penn State . And it 's a place that 's very meaningful to me .
And I was particularly pleased that Tim could be joined by his wonderful wife , Anne , who is the commissioner of education in the Commonwealth of Virginia .
And I was so pleased that I could be joined by my husband , who knows a little bit about getting the economy to work well for everybody .
And if you 're looking for a kind of pessimistic , downbeat vision of America , we 're not your folks .
We do not buy into that dark , divisive image that was presented at the Republican convention last week .
Donald Trump says America is weak , that we 're in decline .
Well , all I can tell you is , we are the best-placed country in the world to seize the future .
But that doesn't happen by wishing for it . It happens by building for it , something that you here at K'NEX know a lot about .
That 's why we 're on a jobs tour . We want to tell you what we will do if we 're so fortunate enough to be the president and vice president .
We know that companies like this one provide some very important lessons .
You have to have a well-trained workforce . The STEM and STED skills are important for the combination of design and production .
We know that if we 're smart about it , we can bring jobs back from China and other places if we make up our minds to do that , just like that 's happened here .
We know that companies that invest in their employees as we were walking through the back , I introduced myself to a few of the employees .
One had been here 24 years . One had been here 23 years because Rodon and K'NEX actually see employees as assets to be invested in and treated with respect .
So that 's why I 've laid out throughout this campaign very specific plans about how we 're going to get the economy growing again , creating more good jobs , and helping people acquire the skills to fill the more than one million jobs that are available in America today , that are open , that are not being filled .
There 's nothing we can't do if we make up our minds that we 're going to address these challenges .
So let me just briefly say we 're going to make big investments in infrastructure , advanced manufacturing , clean energy technology .
We 're going to do more to help small businesses start , grow , and succeed .
We 're going to make it possible for more people to acquire the skills that you need to be competitive in the economy of today and tomorrow .
We 're also going to make it a government policy to invest money in manufacturing communities , like Hatfield , so that more companies can make it in America .
It 's absolutely wrong that American companies take tax breaks and then export jobs .
They get the tax breaks in order to have jobs in America , and I believe if they take tax breaks and then they try to export jobs , they should have to pay back every single penny of every tax [ ] made for our country .
And we will then put that to work in communities like Hatfield with companies like this .
We 're also going to make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century .
Now , this is something that I think is such an opportunity for America .
As I said last night , I believe in climate change .
It 's real . It 's happening . I 'm not denying it .
Why would I deny it ? It 's real . [ ]
And we can either wring our hands , or we can deny it , or we can accept it and we can treat it as both a challenge and opportunity .
So that 's why I want us to produce and deploy half a billion more solar panels in the next four years , and enough clean energy to power every home in America .
And I know that there 's clean energy jobs here in Montgomery County .
Right , Marcel ? Because I have visited some of those clean energy jobs .
Some states are moving ahead and creating more clean energy through wind and solar and geothermal and other approaches .
Some states are denying it . There 's a Republican governor in Florida who sent out an edict to his state employees as governor , if you can believe it , telling them that they would be disciplined and maybe lose their jobs if they wrote about or talked about climate change .
( Booing . ) And then down in South Florida , you have noonday floods happening .
You have salt water getting into wells . Of all the states in America that are the most at danger from climate change , Florida is number one .
And you 've got a governor who is denying it at the cost of increasing insurance premiums and other kinds of risks .
This is crazy . And when somebody like Donald Trump says , well , he thinks it 's a hoax , and that he 's not a scientist , well , go talk to a scientist .
There are a lot of them right here in Montgomery County .
We 're going to make sure that people start making and building things in America because we know that small businesses are at the core of creating most of the good jobs in America .
As you heard Tim Kaine say , Donald Trump goes around with that hat on , Make America Great Again .
Everything he makes he makes somewhere else besides America . The only thing he makes in America are bankruptcies , both his own and of the people who [ ]
And it really is shocking . I didn't know any of this before he became the leading Republican candidate .
But then I started running into people who told me stories .
Then I went to Atlantic City , and I met small businesses that had been ruined because they took work offered by one of Trump 's hotels and casinos .
I met the man who installed the glass in one of his casinos , a small company .
Submitted the bill . The work was done . The Trump organization said , no , we 're not going to pay .
What do you mean , you 're not going to pay ?
I did the work . I employed people . I put my money up front to buy the supplies .
We 're not going to pay you . It 's shocking .
Then after a while they 'll come back and they basically say to the small businesses , go ahead and sue us .
He keeps a battery of lawyers on hand in order to make it impossible for people to sue and be successful even when they 're in the right .
I met the man whose small business third generation , as I recall supplied all the marble for one of the casinos .
Same thing happened . We 're not going to pay you .
It 's shocking . Then they come back and say , well , maybe we 'll pay you 50 cents on the dollar .
Maybe 30 cents on the dollar . The marble company and its owners had to take bankruptcy , and they didn't walk away with somebody else 's money the way that Trump did .
They were destroyed as a company . We have a film about an architect who designed the clubhouse at one of Trump 's golf courses .
It was a big job for this small architectural firm .
He was really proud of it . Finished it . Ribbon cutting .
It was opened . Events being held . The architect submits his bill .
Doesn't hear anything . A couple months go by . He calls .
They say , we 're not going to pay it .
The architect was so shocked , he said , well , I have to talk to Mr. Trump .
I can't believe he knows what you 're doing . Fine .
The architect was in New York City . Goes into one of those big buildings with Trump 's name on it .
Gets ushered into an office . Trump 's there with his lawyers .
We 're not going to pay for it . But it 's built .
I did the work . If you want to take 30 cents on the dollar , that 's all you 're going to get .
I tell you those stories because if someone runs for president and says their primary qualification for being president is because they claim to be a successful businessman , then it 's only fair to ask , how did you become successful ?
We don't resent success in America . But we do resent people who take advantage of others in order to line their own pockets on the way up .
If I weren't the Democratic nominee , I would still be going around the country saying , hey , take a hard look .
When someone says , I can fix it alone , what does that really mean ?
Because I don't know anybody who can . Instead , we are stronger together .
We 're going to work together . We 're going to set goals together .
We 're going to achieve those goals . And the centerpiece of my presidency will be more good-paying jobs with rising incomes for more Americans , because if you 're willing to work hard , you ought to be able to get ahead and stay ahead , in my experience .
I 'm just so happy to be here in a company with such a great history , such great values , such a great success , bring jobs back from China , and then exporting around the world .
That 's what we have to do . Nobody can outcompete America when we put our mind to it .
We 're going to roll up our sleeves and we 're going to get to work , and America 's best years are still ahead of us .
Thank you all . TIM KAINE : How you guys doing ?
So good to be here at Johnstown Wire , and thank you for welcoming us .
I want to thank Jim and Ron . And I had a great chance to visit with Nick a little bit , and heard about what you all do .
It is a treat for us to bring our bus tour here .
You can see my voice has gotten a little hoarse this week .
I don't know why . It 's not like I 've been doing a lot of talking .
I want to say a special thanks to Leo Gerard , the head of the steel workers .
Leo , it 's so good to have you here .
The largest steelworker union in the international , the largest [ ] local , is in Newport News , Virginia .
Local [ ] , which is the manufacturers who build the most complicated things on planet Earth nuclear aircraft carriers and subs .
So we 're glad to have our steel workers there in Virginia , Leo .
This has been an incredible week . And my wife , Anne , up until a couple of days ago was the Secretary of Education in Virginia , but she stepped down to campaign full time so we can get Hillary Clinton elected President .
The week has been amazing , and I 'm just really humbled and honored to be part of this ticket .
Being asked by a public servant who is as superb as Hillary Clinton , to join her on this ticket and to do good things for the economy , to grow it so that all benefit , to make us strong in the world with stronger alliances to build a community of respect
It 's deeply humbling . There has only been one bad thing about being asked to join this ticket .
And I 'll just be blunt about it . Once I was on the ticket , Donald Trump had to decide how he was going to make fun of me .
So he basically decided at a press conference a couple of days ago , it really hurt my feelings , by saying what a lousy governor of New Jersey I had been .
When you work hard in public life , and then somebody trashes your record , you feel bad .
I was feeling bad for a few minutes , and I thought ,
Wait a minute , I wasn't governor of New Jersey .
I 've never lived in New Jersey . I was governor of Virginia . '
So then I started to feel better . You 've got
listen , you 've got to give the guy a break .
He 's new at this . He 's still getting the briefing memos on 50 states and New Jersey 's different than Virginia .
So give him time , I guess , give him time .
Well , look . I took this nomination a couple of days ago , and I talked about my own background , which makes me feel proud to be here .
I was talking to Jim and Ron and Nick as we came in .
I grew up in Kansas City , and my dad ran an iron-worker organized ironworking and welding shop in the stockyards of Kansas City .
My mom was his best salesman . My brothers and I worked in a manufacturing business that is pretty similar to this , except a whole lot smaller .
Five employees plus family and [ ] , plus family in a good year , but I know the deep importance of manufacturing : the deep importance of cooperation between management and union labor .
So that 's why I 'm so glad to come here today .
And we 're on this tour so that we can talk about the American Economy : to talk about manufacturing ; to talk about the way to grow jobs and make sure everybody benefits from our economic growth , not just a few .
And that 's why I admire Hillary so very , very much .
She No , please . please . Hillary also grew up in a small business family .
You know , we were comparing notes . The businesses were different , but one thing 's the same if you grow up in a small business family .
Everybody , it 's all hands on deck , just like this campaign .
Everybody comes down and the kids come down . If you 've got to get an order or if it 's a holiday or a weekend and something is needed , everybody gets pressed into service .
And she learned those same values growing up in her family in suburban Chicago and she 's been living them for her entire career .
And she 's got just about the best life partner that you could imagine if you 're trying to serve others .
Please give a great round of applause to President Clinton .
For all of us on stage and frankly for anybody who 's got their values straight , it 's not about title , it is not about money , it is not about prestige , it 's not about popularity it 's about what you can do to help folks out .
And that 's why I 'm so excited to be here on this tour with Hillary , Bill and my wife Anne .
For us to just be sitting on a bus shooting the breeze with Hillary and Bill Clinton
I mean , I 've got to tell you , I 'm still sort of pinching myself .
And yesterday we have a boy in the Marines who deployed overseas earlier this week .
And we were able to and [ ] that Nick is a Marine we were able to get him on the phone and talk to our running mates , and man that just blew him away .
That 's something that he felt so good about many time zones away .
But look , we 're here because the convention was great and Pennsylvania did a superb job .
We think we know hospitality in Virginia , but Philly and Pennsylvania did a superb job .
But this is the part of the campaign I like best , not in the suit but with the jacket off and with the tie off , just going out and pounding the pavement .
100 days from now and we are pounding the pavement to make sure we win .
On this bus tour , which is in Pennsylvania and Ohio , we 're talking about creating jobs , raising wages and the leadership that we need to show in order to make that possible .
In this county , you 've got 125 to 129 manufacturing businesses just like Johnstown Wire that employ nearly 4,000 people .
And Hillary 's going to talk at some length about our Make It in America ' plan that will invest $10 billion in communities just like Johnstown .
We 'll put workers first , we 'll put their wages first , we 'll put their families first .
We 'll reject trade agreements like the TPP that don't meet the standards that they ought to meet .
And we need to do something that has a direct tie to Johnstown Wire 's business , which is invest in infrastructure , so that everybody 's able to get around .
We can have a power grid that works , we 've got bridges that are solid , because these kinds of jobs and infrastructure hire people today and raise our platform of economic success down the road .
This way to build the economy so that all benefit is just one of the few issues at stake in the campaign , but it 's really the most important one , because if we can build those ladders of success for every community and every industry and every region , then our country 's going to be very , very strong .
We saw in Philadelphia this week a united Democratic Party .
And look , for Dems that 's not always just an automatic .
I will just be honest . We came in and there were challenges , because we are a family that doesn't mind airing debates and having robust debates and there were challenges on Monday morning , but by Thursday night , when our candidate hit the stage , took the nomination and laid out her vision for the country , they saw the Democrats pull together behind a relentlessly upbeat and patriotic view of this country , right ?
And aren't we all patriots and aren't we all optimists ?
I think the vision we put on display was a sharp contrast from the darker and more twisted version that we saw in Cleveland and we like being the upbeat , positive people .
We don't sugarcoat stuff , we don't whitewash challenges , but we know we can solve our challenges because of you .
This election , the stakes are very clear and the stakes are very high .
It 's a choice between a leader who 's been working her entire life on behalf of families and children or somebody who 's spent his entire life watching out for himself no matter who gets hurt .
There 's a story that the campaign has told of a guy named Andrew Tesoro who 's an architect .
You might have seen it there 's a video and an ad , and the reason we mention him , he lives in New York
but he 's been teaching over at Carnegie Mellon , so that 's why I wanted to mention him , Donald Trump hired him as an architect to design a clubhouse for one of his golf courses , that was a huge honor to him .
He believed Donald Trump . He believed he could do good work for him , and he did .
He honored his part of the bargain , he designed , and they built this clubhouse , this very nice place .
But as he so often does , Donald decided ,
Hey , I can stiff this guy . ' And even told him ,
You know what , because you 're a nice guy , I 'll pay you half . ' You know , if he didn't like him , he was going to pay him less than that .
And Andrew couldn't hire the [ ] lawyers to go after a big machine like the Trump machine .
And so I guess he figured , well , I guess , probably can't go after him .
So maybe I 'll have to settle for half . But after he did that , Trump had second thoughts about paying him half .
He bullied this guy , this small business owner , this entrepreneur , he threatened him , he said he 'd tie him up in court forever , and so the guy basically had to settle for virtually zip when he had already done all of the work .
He had already paid for all of his work , all of his folks , and all the entire project , and built the clubhouse that Trump gets to take advantage of and enjoy .
This was a small business that took a punch because they believed Donald Trump .
So when it comes to Trump there is , there are just too many stories like that , I talked about it at the convention the other night , so many people
when they believed in him , they found out they got stiffed .
And now he 's still saying , Hey folks , believe me . '
We 've got a candidate who respects you enough to lay out a plan , here 's what I 'll do , here 's how I 'll do it .
And I thought when of the best lines that Hillary said the other night was , I 've got details , but remembers when it 's about your own kid , or it 's about your own business , it 's not a detail , it 's a big deal , and you ought to have to tell people , what you 're going to do . '
But Trump just says , Look , believe me .
Trust me . ' And we 'd be fools to do it .
I can't help but think what would have happened if my dad 's business had been trying to do work with seven or eight employees for a guy like Trump , who just felt like he could use them and then just kick them aside , I wouldn't have the opportunities I have today had my Dad dealt with people like that when he was running his iron-working shop .
So the last thing I 'll say before I bring up the Secretary is this : Virginia and Pennsylvania share something in common , and that is we call ourselves a commonwealth , not a state .
There 's 46 states and there are four commonwealths , Kentucky , Pennsylvania , Mass , and Virginia .
Once when I was Lieutenant Governor I went to a school and I talked to a student just about your age , young lady , standing right in front of me , and I was in a classroom and a little girl asked me ,
Hey , why are we a Commonwealth and everybody else is states ? '
And I did what a good politician was who doesn't know the answer , I made something up on the spot .
And I said , Commonwealth a state is a dotted line , it 's geography , Commonwealth says , it 's something about our values . '
The wealth we hold , we hold in common , it 's got to be about the community .
It 's got to be about bringing everybody together , and Pennsylvania , you have the boldness to say
that 's how you want to be known , and in Virginia , we have the boldness to say that 's how we want to be known .
That 's our values . The wealth we hold , we hold in common , and those are Hillary Clinton 's values too .
So , I 'll just ask you this last question and then bring up our next President .
I think as far as it goes with the economy , we 've got a really , really clear choice , and I 'll boil it down to this : Johnstown , Pennsylvania do you want a
you 're fired ' President , or a you 're hired ' President ?
I mean I don't think it could be any simpler , we 've got a you 're hired ' President in Hillary Clinton , and I 'm so proud to be her running mate and I 'm so proud to bring her up to talk to you !
Hillary Clinton , give her a big round ! HILLARY CLINTON :
Well I 'll tell you what , I 'm glad I told Tim Kaine ,
You 're hired , ' because you just got a great look at why the people of the Commonwealth of Virginia keep promoting him .
He started off in the city council of Richmond , went on to become mayor of his hometown , got elected Lieutenant Governor then Governor , and now United States Senator , because he 's someone who really instills confidence in those whom he serves .
And as America gets to know him , that 's exactly what I think will happen as well .
We 've got an incredible week here in Pennsylvania , I can't tell you how much I love being here .
And some of you may know that my father was from Scranton .
My grandfather came as a small child from England , immigrant , to Scranton with his family .
He worked in the Scranton lace mills , a factory his entire life , because he believed that he could produce a better life for his children , and he did .
And every time I come to Pennsylvania , I think about the many journeys we made from where we lived , outside of Chicago , to Scranton , every single year .
We would go every summer , we went some Christmases , I was brought back , as were my brothers to be christened in the little Court Street Methodist Church , we really have a great deal of love and affection for Pennsylvania .
My father plus one of my brothers played football at Penn State , so
It 's always a joy for me to be here .
And to come to Johnstown , a place that I 've been to before and look forward to coming back and being here .
And having this opportunity to come and visit with you .
I want to thank Ron and Jim for welcoming us , [
] thank you for explaining some of the work you do and telling us that Nick was a Marine at Camp David when Bill was President , we 've actually met him in his prior life , so that was a very special treat .
I want to thank my friend Leo Gerard , a man who has fought for justice , for working families in America , North America , and who sets a great example , as does this company , where business and labor work together .
And Ron and Jim told me about something called gain share , where when you get more productive , get more productive , don't have as much scrap , those gains are shared .
That 's what I believe we ought to be doing in every single business in our country .
So on Thursday , I was incredibly humbled and grateful to accept the Democratic Party nomination .
I have to tell you , it was pretty overwhelming to be out there and to think about the awesome responsibility of taking on the challenges facing our country , but I 'm an optimist , and I 'm confident , because I think if you look at American history , that 's how we get things done .
It 's not the whiners and the complainers and the insulters who move our country forward .
It 's the workers and the builders , it 's people who get up every day and try to figure out how it 's going to be better for them and their families .
So then yesterday , Tim and I and Anne and Bill hit the road , going across Pennsylvania
sorry we were a little late , the rain was really heavy
and we have kind of a long convoy , so I apologize for that , but we are visiting places that prove what Americans can do .
We have the most productive , competitive workers in the world , we just need to give our people the chance to succeed .
So from Philadelphia to Hatfield to Harrisburg and now here in Johnstown , that 's exactly what we 're doing .
We 're talking to people , meeting people who have each others ' backs .
And you truly are the reason why I have so much confidence that America 's best days are still ahead of us , so
It 's in stark contrast to the vision that Donald Trump is laying out , because I don't think we 're weak .
I don't think we 're in decline . I think we can pull together because we are stronger together , and if anybody like him spent a day on the factory floor here , they 'd see what teamwork looks like .
They 'd understand what it means to create and build .
Every day you are showing that America is home to the best products , the hardest workers , the most innovative entrepreneurs in world .
And so as we are honest about our challenges here at home and abroad , let 's start from understanding that this country and our people have what it takes to get ahead and stay ahead if we have the leadership that gives us that chance .
And most of all , we know better than to believe anybody that says , I alone can fix it . '
Right ? Those were actually Donald Trump 's words at the Republican Convention in Cleveland last week .
And I think they should set off alarm bells for everybody .
Because by saying that , he 's forgetting what all the rest of us do every day .
He 's forgetting our troops on the front lines ; our businesses who see possibilities in every problem ; our unions who fight for working families every day .
He 's forgetting companies like this one who invest in employees .
Americans don't say , I alone can fix it . '
We say , Oh , okay . How are we going to fix this together ?
How are we going to raise a family , build a business , heal a community , lift a country ? '
And that 's why we have to stand together . My grandfather , as I said , worked at the Scranton lace mills from the time he was a teenager , until he retired at the age of 65 .
It was dangerous work in those days , but he was one of the kindest and gentlest men I 've ever known .
He knew that hard work in America meant that his family would get ahead that it would pay off .
And he was right . My dad , as I said , made it to college , made it to Penn State .
Now , if he were still alive , he 'd tell you it 's because he played football .
But that 's okay . He got an education . He was proud to get it .
He started working as a salesman , enlisting in the Navy after Pearl Harbor .
And when the war was over , he started his own small business printing fabric for draperies .
And it was a really small business . He would recruit my mother , my brothers and me .
He had a print plant . It didn't have any natural light .
It was a pretty dark place . But it had long tables where the fabric would be rolled out , and then the silk screens would be laid on the fabric .
And then the paint for the color you wanted to put on the fabric would be poured onto the silkscreen , and then we would take squeegee .
One person on one side of the table , another person at the other side sometimes me .
We 'd take that squeegee . We 'd roll it you had to add exactly the right pressure to the other side of the silk screen , lift it up , move the screen , go down the table and keep going .
I remember watching my dad standing for hours over those silk screens .
Why did he do it ? Because he wanted to give my brothers and me opportunities he never had .
And he did . I believe every single family in America deserves that same chance in 2016 .
And you know , I know we 're living in a time of really hot politics .
People say all kinds of things hateful things ; insulting things .
I 'm sorry about that . I think we should have a much better dialogue and debate so that voters can decide which way they want to go .
And sometimes , because of all of the static going back and forth , we lose track of where we are .
We 've come along way since the worst financial crisis in a generation .
And it could have gotten a whole lot worse , my friends .
When I think back to 2008 , I was in the Senate then , before I accepted President Elect 's offer , President Elect Obama 's offer , to become Secretary of State .
We were losing 800,000 jobs . 9 million Americans lost their jobs .
5 million homes were lost . But it 's fair to say we did not know where the bottom was .
Unemployment : over 10 percent . Stock market : down to 7,000 .
This was one of the riskiest economic moments in our country 's recent history .
And I will say it : I don't think President Obama and Vice President Biden get the credit they deserve for doing what they had to do to save our economy .
And one thing they saved , and I 'll say it over the opposition of the Republican Party , they saved American auto industry , which is a big customer of this plant .
I found that debate back then just unbelievable . People saying , giving speeches : Let the American auto industry just fall .
Millions of jobs were at stake many millions more families of the people who worked in the American auto industry .
And I 'm proud that it was saved , and I 'm even prouder that it had the best year it 's had in a long time last year on behalf of selling American-made automobiles .
So that 's progress . And I just want people , as we go into this election , to be fair .
Because yes , we do have work to do . We can't be satisfied with the status quo
I 'm not . Not by a long shot . We 're still facing deep-seated problems that developed long before that recession and have stayed with us through the recovery .
But let 's be fair and let 's be clear about where we 've come from and where we need to go .
And let 's not buy the same failed economic policies that got us into the mess we were in in the first place .
You know that old saying : Fool me once , shame on you .
Fool me twice , shame on me . When people come around and say they 're going to cut taxes on the wealthiest Americans , we have seen this before and it does not turn out well .
And it 's about time we say , No , we 're going to make the wealthiest Americans , for a change , pay their fair share of taxes and support America .
That 's why I 've gone around the country talking to working families across America .
And I 've heard all the concerns people have that , you know , the economy isn't working it needs to .
Too many people feel like they 're out on their own .
Well I can tell you that Tim Kaine and I will get up every single day .
We will fight for you and we will work for you .
We will look out for you . How do you know that ?
Because I 've actually told you what I want to do .
I 'm not standing here insulting my opponent and making crazy promises .
I 'm telling you what I want to do . I actually have plans .
Some people make fun of me for having plans . Yes , it used to hurt my feelings .
It doesn't anymore . At each of conventions , you get four days to tell the country what you want to do .
That 's what they 're supposed to be for . At the Republican convention , they spent more time on insults for me than on jobs for you .
Donald Trump spoke for 75 minutes and offered zero solutions .
Now , I don't think that 's good enough . I have the [ ] idea if you 're going to ask somebody for their vote , we owe you a clear explanation of what you 're going to get for it .
And I have said from the beginning of this campaign , my mission from first day to my last , will be to create more opportunity and more good wages that will give people a chance at their own dreams .
We 're going to create jobs in Pennsylvania and across America , especially in places that have been left out and left behind .
And that means from our inner cities , to our small towns , to Indian country , to coal country , from communities ravaged by addiction like too many in this county .
I believe with all my heart that the economy should work for everyone , not just those at the top .
Leo knows because when I was privileged to work with him .
To stand up for steelworkers . To start the very first Manufacturing Caucus in the United States Senate .
I had no idea then that I was going to run for president .
What I cared about is that I had lots of great people in New York who saw their jobs leave .
Who lost them to automation and technology . Who were the victims of efforts to bust unions and undercut fair wages and benefits .
So what I wanted to do was to make it clear that in America , we 're going to keep making things .
Anyone willing to work hard should be able to find a job that pays well enough to support a family .
That 's the basic bargain of America . So , here 's how we 're going to do it .
Within the first 100 days of our administration , we are going to break the gridlock in Washington and make the biggest investment in new , good paying jobs since World War II . We will start by making the boldest investment in America infrastructure since we built the Interstate Highway System back in the 1950s .
Now , Donald Trump may think we never win anymore and our country is full of losers , but , boy , is he wrong .
We still do big things and we can do more big things .
We 're not going to build a giant wall , we 're going to build roads and bridges and tunnels and forts and airports and water systems and a new electric [ ] .
And we 're going to connect up all of America to high-speed internet connectivity .
You know , yesterday night in Harrisburg we had a great rally at the Broad Street Market , if any of you know that .
We were outdoors . It was a beautiful night . And I said , you know , I 'm not just talking traditional infrastructure .
I 'm talking about broadband , virtual infrastructure . Electricity .
And I made a point that some teachers told me .
There 's been a recent survey . 70 percent of teachers said that they assign homework that requires the student to go on the internet .
Well , you know , that makes sense if you 're going to live in an information age you want your kids to be prepared and smart and savvy about how to use the internet .
But here 's the kicker 5 million don't have access at home to high-speed internet .
And then I was talking to some of the people who were there after the rally and they said boy , were you right .
We have places in Pennsylvania where it 's still dial up .
I mean , how are we supposed to be competitive in the rest of the world if we have smart , hardworking people their businesses , their kids their essentially shut out of being able to access information quickly and use that information .
So , we 're talking broadly here . And I 'm going to do everything we can to create a national infrastructure bank so that we are going to have investments made every year , not just when Congress decides to appropriate money for that .
The second thing we 're going to do is invest in American manufacturing .
Anybody who thinks we can't make it in America ought to come to Pennsylvania and do a tour as I have .
Now , the products that you 're making here in the Commonwealth are being sold all over the world , including products made right here .
Ron and Jim were telling me about a big order you had from Bangladesh .
You know , we can export . Donald Trump , you hear him , he talks a big game about putting America first .
Well , with all due respect , please explain to me what part of America first leads Trump to make Trump dress shirts in Bangladesh , not Ashland , Pennsylvania .
Or to make Trump furniture in Turkey , not Freeburg , Pennsylvania .
Or Trump picture frames in India , not Bristol , Pennsylvania .
In fact , my husband told me on the bus ride here that I was telling him that I just find it maddening that Trump goes around saying this and all the stuff he makes , he makes in other countries .
And Bill says , well you know the shirt that he has one right now , he said that 's made in Reading , Pennsylvania .
And , look , you 're not going to believe this because it 's going to sound too coincidental it 's made at a company called Bills .
Well , so Donald Trump says he wants to make America great again .
Well , he could start by actually making things in America again .
Now , if we 're serious about investing in America manufacturing , we have to be serious about defending American workers , and that means we 've got to defend the right to organize and bargain collectively , which helped to build the American middle class in the first place .
That 's why I love coming to plants like this that work business and labor together .
But , that 's not Donald Trump . He actually hires union busting firms to break up organizing campaigns .
He did that at the hotel in Las Vegas . And then he says he wants to do to America what he 's done to his businesses .
We can't let that happen . We 're going to fight back against attacks on working families , against assaults on the right to organize and bargain collectively .
Right to work is wrong for workers and it 's wrong for America .
And we 're going to say no to unfair trade deals .
We 're going to stand up to China . We 're going to support our steelworkers , our autoworkers , our homegrown manufacturers .
I feel strongly about this , and I need your help .
I need your ideas about how we 're going to do this because I 'm sick and tired of us having an open market where everybody gets to sell to us , and they often do it at lower costs , undercutting our workers , our businesses , that 's not fair and it 's not right .
Now we 've won a few cases , haven't we Leo , in the International Trade Commission ?
But we 're going to go after that much more aggressively .
I will be the first President who has what I 'm calling a trade prosecutor to prosecute cases that are undercutting and hurting American manufacturers .
Third , we 're going to make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century because there are millions of new jobs and businesses in that .
Pennsylvania is doing some good work . We owe to future generations to work together to combat climate change , not dismiss it as a Chinese hoax the way Donald Trump has .
I love this he dismisses it as a Chinese hoax when he 's standing on a stage running for president and then he goes and asks for help because he 's worried about some of his golf courses that are maybe going to be hurt by climate change .
I mean that is just hard to believe but we 've got to take it for what it is .
There is no other Donald Trump ; you 've got to look at it from both sides here .
So we 're going to set bold goals . We 're going to install a half a billion solar panels and generate enough clean energy to power every home in America within 10 years .
And we are going to create more good-paying jobs , clean energy jobs like the ones that are being created here in Pennsylvania .
Fourth , we 're going to support small businesses like the one that my Dad and Tim 's Dad ran , put their hearts and souls into them when we were growing up .
And it 's important for you to know this . Just as Tim told you , we don't make this up .
We actually try to tell you what is factually accurate .
We go to a lot of trouble so we can tell you what is actually happening , not just pull it from the air .
Just a few hours away in Atlantic City , you 're going to find a lot of hard-working contractors , small businesses , workers , painters , plumbers who lost everything because Donald Trump refused to pay his bills .
We 've been meeting some of these people painters , landscapers , plumbers , glass-installers , marble-installers people who did the work and deserve to be paid and didn't get it , not because he couldn't pay them but because he wouldn't pay them .
That 's just not the way it works in America , Donald .
In America we make good on our promises and when somebody puts in the work you are supposed to pay them .
You can't go around bullying small businesses like the one Tim 's Dad ran or my father if my father had done all that work to print those drapery fabrics and most of his customers were hotels and businesses , and he used to load them into a van and deliver them and then put them up after all that work , Donald Trump had said , We 're not going to pay you ,
my father first of all would have been stunned . And then he would have been furious .
But what could he have done ? Trump would have said ,
Well you don't like it ? Sue me . Otherwise take 30 cents on the dollar .
That is so wrong , it just gets my blood boiling .
I think about my Dad , I 'm sure Tim thinks about his small businesspeople who did not deserve to be treated like that and 98 percent of businesses in Pennsylvania are small businesses .
That 's one million small businesses , creating jobs , strengthening communities .
When you hurt small businesses , you hurt our economy .
It 's time we gave small businesses a boost . Let 's cut the red tape , let 's make it easier to get credit .
Way too many dreams die in the parking lots of banks these days and we 're going to change that too .
In America , if you can dream it , you should be able to build it .
And I will tell you how we 're going to pay for everything that I 've just proposed .
That 's not complicated , either . Wall Street , corporations , and the super rich are going to start paying their fair share of taxes .
Now let me be absolutely clear here , we don't resent success in America .
But when more than 90 percent of the gains in income have gone to the top one percent , that 's where the money is .
Remember that old movie ? Follow the money ! Well , that 's what we 're going to do .
American corporations that have gotten so much from our country should be just as patriotic in return .
Many of them are . Johnstown Wire Technologies is , but too many aren't .
So under our plan , if companies try to move headquarters to another country to avoid paying their taxes , we will make them pay an exit tax .
It 's wrong to take tax breaks with one hand and give out pink slips with the other .
So we 're going to take back all the money that counties and cities and our governments have given to companies .
We 'll make them pay it back . And we 'll put that money to work right here , creating good jobs .
The basic principle is simple . America thrives when the middle class thrives , and I will not rest until we get wages and incomes rising for all Americans , not just those at the top .
Just yesterday , an economist who advised John McCain , the Republican candidate for President in 2008 , just put out a new analysis .
He analyzed what Trump has said . He analyzed what I 've proposed .
He said my plans would create millions more jobs than Trump 's .
In fact , under my plans , the economy would create at least 10 million jobs in our first term .
As for Donald Trump ? Well , his policies were found that they would actually cost us nearly three and a half million jobs .
So what 's the difference between Donald Trump 's plan and my plan in terms of jobs created ?
The combined workforce of Pennsylvania and Ohio . In fact , the more you listen to Donald Trump , the more you realize he is not offering real change .
He 's offering empty processes , and what little we know about his economic policies , from running up our debt , to starting trade wars , to letting Wall Street run wild , could devastate working families .
So here we are , my friends . Now I know we 've got to fight for every single vote .
And I 'm ready to do that . That 's why we 're on this bus tour , that 's why Tim and I and Bill and Anne and our campaigns are going to cover the country .
Because we want you to know the differences . We want you to understand what we 're proposing and why we think it will work , and to contrast that with what Trump is saying .
Now when I say things like this , like his plans would cost 3.5 million jobs , although I 'm just quoting an economist , he lashes out .
He loses his cool at the slightest provocation . Just yesterday , he went after retired general John Allen , who commanded our troops in Afghanistan .
General Allen is a distinguished Marine , a hero and a patriot .
Donald Trump called him a failed general . Why ?
Because he does not believe Donald Trump should be Commander in Chief .
Well I 'd say that proves it . Our Commander in Chief shouldn't insult and deride our generals , retired or otherwise .
That really should go without saying , but I 'm going to respond on behalf of General Allen to those kinds of insults .
So , look , I know people are angry and frustrated .
I think we just heard one . I understand that .
I 'm not going into this with some kind of rose-colored glasses .
I know we 've got work to do , but I 'll tell you this , when you 're President , and I know it , because I had a front row seat .
I watched my husband as he struggled , and after eight years , we had 23 million new jobs , my friends .
Incomes went up for everybody . And then , unfortunately , the Republicans came back .
They slashed taxes on the wealthy , I voted against that .
I spoke against that . Then they took their eyes off of the financial markets and the mortgage markets and you know what happened .
And then we elected another Democratic president , who inherited another mess from the Republicans .
It 's our choice , America . We can grow together , we can have plans that will enable us to create more jobs , give more people a chance to live up to their own dreams .
Or we can go with demagoguery . We can go with insults .
We can go with no plans and insofar as they are even understandable , that would cost us jobs .
That 's the choice . And boy , is it a historic choice for America .
I 'm going to do everything I can in this campaign to make the case about what we can do , being stronger together .
And I 'm not going to respond to what Trump says about me , I don't really care .
I 've grown a pretty thick skin . But I 'm going to respond when he insults Americans , when he insults workers , when he insults unions , when he insults people who work hard for a living every single day .
So let 's go out , let 's make our case , let 's win the election !
Thank you and God bless you ! TIM KAINE :
Hey , Pittsburgh ! You guys look great ! One of the hard things about being the VP nominee is they make you follow Mark Cuban .
I mean , that guy is great . Give it up for your native .
Give it up for your homeboy . I am so happy to be here in Pittsburgh .
I 'm Tim Kaine , Senator of Virginia , and I am so proud that Hillary Clinton has asked me to be her running mate in a race where we 're going to make history for this country , and then after November 8 when we win , we 're going to make history every day by doing great things for Americans .
Give it up for Hillary Clinton ! And I 've just been doing this little bus tour for the last couple days with Hillary Clinton and President Clinton and my wife Anne .
You know , it 's just a regular week in the Kaine household .
We have been having a spectacular time . And I just can't tell you how proud I am to be on this stage with Hillary , with President Clinton , and my wife Anne .
I 've had a blessed life . Grew up in a manufacturing household .
My dad ran an organized ironworking shop in the stockyards of Kansas City .
I was a missionary in Honduras , civil rights lawyer for 17 years in Richmond , Virginia , and then I was a city councilman and mayor .
I honor all the elected officials here tonight , especially our local guys city councilmen , mayors , members of county commissions .
If you 're doing work at the local level , you understand folks ' heart .
And I give all of these folks here great praise .
We got a great cheering section behind . And I 'll just say one other thing about what an honor it is for me .
I encouraged Hillary Clinton in April of 2014 , Please get in and run for president in 2016 . '
And I did that because I knew it would be a challenging time
and she would be the best-qualified person to be president of this country , absolutely .
But I was also struck as we stood on the stage in Philadelphia and I 'll tell you , Pennsylvania showed a lot of hospitality , did a great job at the convention .
As I stood on the stage at that history-making moment , when the balloons were falling and we realized that a major party had nominated a woman to be president for the first time in the history of this nation , and I thought about every strong woman who has supported me during my life and during 22 years and eight electoral campaigns , including my fantastic wife Anne , Virginia 's former Secretary of Education .
And I realized this is an election that can not only make history for the country and do good things , but it gives every strong man in this country to show that they can support strong women leadership just as much as strong women have supported us for hundreds of years .
Only one bad thing has happened to me since I got on this ticket , folks , and I 'm just going to be honest .
As soon as I was part of the ticket , Donald Trump had to figure out a name to call me .
I 'd been skating under the radar . He wasn't saying anything about me .
And then I end up being on the ticket , and I take the nomination , and he gives a press conference the next morning and he said that Tim Kaine was a lousy governor of New Jersey .
I mean , when you 're super-sensitive like me , I kind of felt bad .
But then I realized , wait a minute . I never was governor of New Jersey .
I 've never lived in New Jersey . But look , you got to give Donald Trump a break .
He 's new at this the civics , the 50 states .
New Jersey is different than Virginia . I mean , come on .
What do you expect ? What do you expect ? So here 's the deal .
We 're on this bus tour through Pennsylvania and Ohio to talk about how to create an economy that is going to grow and that 's going to provide opportunities for all , not just for a few .
And Mark , the way you said it you 're not going to inspire entrepreneurs and grow jobs by terrifying people ; you 're going to do it by inspiring people .
I mean , it can't be put any better than that .
It can't be put any better than that . And if you boil it all down between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump , it comes down to a pretty simple question .
A pretty simple question . Do you want a You 're fired ' president or a
You 're hired ' president ? I mean , we know Donald Trump is the
You 're fired ' guy , and long after this campaign is over and after he 's lost and after we 've forgotten everything about the Trump campaign , we will remember these two words ,
You 're fired . ' We will remember those two words .
But what 's so great about Hillary is she 's laid it out in pretty clear detail , this is what I want to do to get this economy growing , and growing for all .
And you 're going to hear her talk about that .
It 's growing the skills so that there can be these great new entrepreneurs and great new workers , and making sure that people have the skills , are treated fairly with wages that are fair and benefits that are fair , and pay equity for women , and paid family leave .
If we 're going to honor workers , we got to have policies that honor workers .
Right ? We 've got to have a tax code that is fair to workers .
We have a tax code now that loves investors and punishes workers .
No , you got to have a tax code that I want to love investors , but we got to love workers , too .
And you got to have tax reform to do that .
Advanced manufacturing research . Infrastructures to build roads and ports and buildings , to hire people , and then raise our platform for success .
You go to hillaryclinton.com, one click , you can find out how she 's going to do it all specifically how she 'll do it , how she 'll pay for it , how we 'll benefit .
Sometimes people have criticized her for the details , and what she said the other night is really important .
She said , Well , look . Some people , they don't like the details .
But if it 's your kid or if it 's your business , it ain't a detail .
It 's a big deal . ' And that 's really important .
And that 's really important . Now , I 'll just say this about Donald Trump and then I 'm going to introduce our next president .
So Hillary 's got plans . Hillary 's got plans .
Donald Trump , no plans . Not a single plan .
He will tell you , we 're all going to be rich , but no plan there .
He just says , Believe me . ' We 're going to beat ISIS , believe me . '
We 're going to build a wall and make Mexico pay for it . '
How you going to do it ? ' Believe me . '
Nothing 's funny in tax returns , believe me . '
Hey , by the way , does anybody here think there 's nothing funny about Donald Trump 's tax returns ?
I mean , does anybody here think Donald Trump has been paying his fair share of taxes ?
Does anybody here think that Donald Trump has given a lot of money to charity ?
Does anybody here think Donald Trump should do what every modern presidential candidate has done and release his tax returns so we can make our own decisions ?
Well , the problem with the Believe me ' is that there 's an awful lot of stories about people who did believe Donald Trump contractors who believed him and never got paid ; employees who believed him and saw their jobs outsourced , and they got laid off ; students at Trump University , who not only believed him , but put a whole lot of money in his hands , only to end up with a certificate that wasn't worth the paper that it was written on ; retirees that believed him , gave him their life savings , bought a condo for retirement , only to get no condo and lose all their money .
People have believed Donald Trump , and when people have believed Donald Trump , they 've ended up getting hurt .
So when Donald Trump looks you in the face and says , Believe me , ' is there anybody in here who will believe Donald Trump ?
Absolutely not . Absolutely not . We cannot afford to put a nation as great as ours into the hands of a slick-talking , empty-promising , self-promoting , one-man wrecking crew .
We just can't do it . We just can't do it .
So what we have in Hillary Clinton is a seasoned public servant who has gotten results for people her whole life .
She 's not a me firster . ' She 's a families and kids firster . '
And she has battled from long before she got into public office to make a meaningful difference , whether it 's getting health care for those who went into the buildings after 9/11 to save the victims of a terrorist attack and making sure she could get health care , or whether it 's battling for 8 million American children who have health insurance because of Hillary Clinton .
She would never stand up and say , Believe me . '
She believes in you . And together with you , we 're going to put a great president in and make history .
Please welcome , a warm welcome , Hillary Clinton .
HILLARY CLINTON : Hello , Pittsburgh ! Wow ! Thank you so much !
Thank you ! Thank you ! Thank you very , very much .
Wow ! It is so great being back here in Pittsburgh with all of you , and I can't tell you how happy I am to be here with a Pittsburgh native who worked hard for everything that he has made and has helped a lot of people along the way .
What he exemplifies is the American Dream , but he understands the dream gets bigger the more you share it .
And I want to thank Mark Cuban for being here !
I loved hearing his stories . I especially loved everyone learning what he did when he became successful and sold companies .
He shared . He shared the benefits with everybody who helped him be a success .
He said , when he sold the company , the second one , for a big , big amount of money , he shared it with everybody , made 300 millionaires , including people who were working at minimum wage , because they helped him be a success .
And Mark is right . I want to do what I can to make it possible for more people who help their businesses succeed share in the profits because when we share , we grow .
And you know what I believe : We are stronger together , and that 's how we 're going to make it in America !
Now , I want to thank your elected officials who have been on this pre-program and thank them for their support because I am really looking forward to working with them .
They 're bringing people together on behalf of Pittsburgh and Allegheny County and Western Pennsylvania .
So thanks to Congressman Mike Doyle . Thanks to Mayor Bill Peduto , thanks for Allegheny County Executor Rich Fitzgerald , Councilman Dan Gilman , and Mayor John Fetterman from Braddock PA .
Now , as you heard from Tim Kaine , we are on a bus tour and we are having a great time because you get to drive through Pennsylvania , which really is one of the most beautiful places on Earth and I don't say it because it 's the first time I 've seen it .
My father was born in Scranton , Pennsylvania and every summer of our lives we drove from outside of Chicago where we lived to Scranton .
And because we did it every year and a lot of times also during Christmas , we took different routes .
So I was in Pittsburgh a lot . And my dad and my brother went to Penn State
so I was in State College at lot . So for me this is really a sentimental tour through Pennsylvania , and it gives me such personal joy because I love this commonwealth and I know that a lot of good things are happening here because people are working together .
But we 're going to make more good things happen .
We 're going to have a coordinated , specific set of plans to create more jobs right here in Pennsylvania , to give more people a chance to fulfill their own dreams , to lift up the incomes of hardworking people , to create what I view as an opportunity society , where if you do your part you can get ahead and stay ahead .
That 's the basic bargain of America and we 're going to keep our end of it .
Now , as you heard Tim say , I have laid out plans in this campaign .
I have this old-fashioned idea that basically I 'm being interviewed to be hired .
This is a giant job interview . And I 'm hoping I am hired and the other guy is fired .
But I 'm not asking you I 'm not asking you to vote for me just because I show up and just because I tell you you 're supposed to believe in me and you 're supposed to just count on me to come up with something that I don't tell you about beforehand .
I 'm not doing that . I 'm laying out my plans in this campaign .
And here 's what we 're going to do . We 're going to , in the first 100 days , break through the gridlock in Washington and have the biggest infrastructure and jobs program that we 've had since World War II . We 're going to be investing in our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our ports , our airports , our water systems .
But we 're also going to be investing in a new electric grid that can then take advantage and distribute all the new , clean , renewable energy we 're going to be producing .
And we 're going to do something else . We are going to finish the job of providing high-speed , affordable broadband internet connectivity to every single home and business in America .
I was in Harrisburg last night and I told the crowd there beautiful night , place called the Broad Street Market .
It was just magical . And I told them we were going to do this on broadband .
And then I said I was talking to a bunch of teachers , and they just did a survey , a national survey
I love teachers . I could tell you something about every one of my public school teachers starting in kindergarten all the way through 12th grade .
But I was talking to them and they said 70 percent of the teachers in America assign homework to our kids that requires the kids to go on the internet .
Now , I think that makes sense . Just like Mark was a pioneer in using the internet to deliver services , we want our kids to know how to use it and how to learn from it .
And who knows ? They may grow up and follow in Mark 's footsteps or whatever the next generation is .
But here 's the kicker : 5 million kids in our country don't now have access to the internet in a way that enables them to do the homework they 're asked to do .
That 's 5 million kids who are being left out .
And after I finished saying that in Harrisburg I was walking the line , as I will after I talked here , meeting people , shaking hands , and one of the men I met said ,
You know , that 's only half of it . We still have places in Pennsylvania , ' he told me , where our only option is dial-up . '
Right ? I see heads nodding . How are we going to be a competitive 21st century economy and take on and win in the world if we can't even get broadband , if we can't even get internet connectivity to every single home and business ?
And we 're going to do that . Now , in addition to growing the economy we are going to make it fairer .
And this is a big deal too , because I want everybody to be lifted up .
I want everybody to benefit from their hard work the way Mark has done with his businesses .
There 's a couple of things we can do at the government level as well as encourage more businesses to follow Mark 's example .
We can raise the national minimum wage so that more people have a chance to get themselves out of poverty and into the middle class .
And we can do more to help small businesses because that is where more of the new jobs are created , so let 's do more to get them the credit they need and get rid of the red tape and the bureaucratic obstacles .
But you know the fastest way to raise incomes in America .
It 's pretty simple . Let 's finally guarantee equal pay for women 's work .
Now , I 've got to add , I think most of you know this , but this is not a woman 's issue .
It isn't . Because here 's what I 'd ask you : If you have a working mom , wife , sister , or daughter , it 's your issue .
It 's a family issue . And when women are shortchanged , families are shortchanged and the economy is shortchanged .
And the other thing we 're going to do , we 're going to make sure that we pay for everything I 'm proposing , everything from paid family leave to preschool for kids .
We 're going to make sure we pay for it .
Because I want you to know exactly what I 'm going to do and exactly how I 'm going to pay for it , and I am going to go where the money is .
You know that old movie Follow the Money ? Well , 90 percent of the income gains have gone to the top 1 percent , so we 're going to try to get those who 've been successful sorry , Mark we 're going to try to get those who have been successful to help us fund what will make America even more successful and create more millionaires and more billionaires , more entrepreneurs , more success stories .
You see , I am so excited in part because I 've seen what Pittsburgh has done .
I told you I used to come to Pittsburgh all the time , so I have had a firsthand look at the way this great American city has reinvented itself .
It didn't happen by people insulting each other . It didn't happen by folks pointing fingers and demeaning one another .
It happened because people got together and said , Wait a minute , we love this place . '
Right ? So how do we reimagine and reinvent Pittsburgh for the future ?
Let 's not just keep looking backwards . Let 's look forwards .
How do we create more jobs ? How do we bring young people back ?
During the primary I was at Carnegie Mellon , and I was knocked over by what I saw going on there .
So I get excited . I want us to really believe that America 's best years are ahead of us , but to understand the only way we 're going to make that a reality is by working together and recognizing that we 've got to do more to make sure everybody is brought alone .
Education is still the door to opportunity , but it 's not just one kind of education .
You know I believe we need to start with preschool education , because I want every child prepared to be successful when that child gets to school .
And I want to be sure that in elementary and secondary school we 're providing the tools that kids will need to make the most out of their own talents and ambition .
And so let 's make sure we 've got computer science and coding and technology programs in our high schools again .
And I have a plan to make community college free so that more people can get two-year degrees to get a good job .
There are about a million jobs right now that aren't being filled , and a lot of those jobs are in the trades .
A lot of those jobs require skills . We are going to have a shortage of machinists and welders and tool-and-die makers , and these are good jobs and I want us to start respecting the work that people do to build America again .
And then we 're going to do more with apprenticeship programs .
I 'm going to offer a tax credit so that businesses will provide apprenticeship programs that will pay , that will pay young people to learn the skills that will give them a path to a new job .
And I 'm going to support unions that are already providing apprenticeship programs for young people .
And we are going to make public colleges and universities debt-free so that every single young person can afford to go .
And then we are going to give you ways to refinance your student debt to get the cost down .
It 's just not right . Donald Trump gets to take bankruptcy .
American families and students get stuck . Well , we 're going to change that .
We 're going to give you a way to pay less because we 're going to lower interest rates , pay it as a percentage of your income , put a date certain when your obligations end ; and if you do public service like teaching or policing or firefighting , we 're going to forgive your college debt .
Now , I 'm excited by this because I have seen it work .
I know that if we make up our minds and roll up our sleeves , we will create these jobs and we will unleash a whole new generation of entrepreneurs .
I want young people to feel like they can start their own businesses , they can take chances .
I really appreciated Mark saying , you know what , he didn't succeed 100 percent of the time , I don't know anybody who has .
But you learn by trying , and I want to encourage more Americans not just to dream again but try again .
And I want people to know that we can make things in America , because I believe that if we put our minds to it , we can do more in advanced manufacturing , clean energy technology .
We can bring back some precision machining from Germany and Japan with a public-private partnership where we work to support manufacturers so that they can be competitive worldwide .
Now , Donald Trump talks a big game about putting America first .
But then you actually peel back the story and what do you find ?
He makes Trump shirts in Bangladesh , not Ashland , Pennsylvania .
He makes Trump furniture in Turkey , not Freeburg , Pennsylvania .
He makes Trump picture frames in India , not Bristol , Pennsylvania .
And I just have to point out , my husband is wearing a shirt that was made right here in Pennsylvania , in Reading Reading , Pennsylvania .
And when we were packing for the bus tour and he said ,
Well , what am I supposed to wear , ' I said ,
Well , I don't know . It 's sort of bus tour casual . '
And so he 's going through his closet , and this morning in the hotel in Harrisburg he 's putting this shirt on .
He goes , You know what ? This shirt was made in Reading , Pennsylvania , and you will not believe this , at a company called
Bill 's . ' So we have a very stark choice in this election .
It really is about the difference between pulling together , working together , making the future better together , and living with fear and anxiety and the kinds of insults , the bigotry , the blustering and bullying that we 're seeing from the other side .
Now , I know because I 've had the great experience of observing presidents up close and working for four years for President Obama as Secretary of State and even working with Republican presidents .
I may not have agreed with what their positions were , but I will tell you this : I 've had the great privilege of observing presidents , listening to them , understanding what they 're trying to achieve .
And even where our positions diverge , I have never doubted that they were trying to figure out , in their own minds based on their own experiences , what was right for America .
We 've never had someone run for president who is so manifestly temperamentally unfit and unqualified to be president and commander-in-chief .
And I understand what he 's doing . There are a lot of people in our country who are frustrated .
They feel like maybe the economy has passed them by , that their government doesn't help them , that nobody is listening to them , nobody cares about them .
I get that . That 's why I said in my convention speech I want to be a president for all Americans Republicans , independents Democrats , people who vote for me , people who don't vote for me .
Because I think we all are in this together , and I know that if we decide we 're going to set some big goals for America , we 'll achieve them because that 's what we 've always done .
And so when I think about the next 100 days of this campaign here in Pennsylvania , I will be doing everything I can to reach out and meet as many people as possible .
I will go everywhere that Tim and I and Bill and Ann can reach .
I will make sure that you know what I stand for , what I want to do , because I want you to hold me accountable .
I want you to say , I came and heard her . '
AUDIENCE : Hillary , Hillary , Hillary , Hillary !
HILLARY CLINTON : Because I need your ideas not just during the campaign but afterwards .
I want us to begin a conversation that keeps going .
As president I won't be stuck in the White House .
I 'm going to be traveling around America having meetings , listening , trying to learn what more we can do .
But I can't get there without your help . I am inviting you to join this campaign .
Please , if you will , text JOIN , J-O-I-N , to 47246 or go to hillaryclinton.com, sign up , be part of this campaign .
And by the way , we are hiring organizers in Allegheny County and across Pennsylvania right now .
I want to end where Mark took us , because as I was backstage listening to him
I 've watched him on Shark Tank . And I 've watched him very respectfully try to figure out how can I help somebody .
If I can't , I can't . But if I can , here 's what I 'd like to do .
And I 've really admired that , Mark . I really did .
Because we 've got to have that attitude in our country again .
How are we going to help each other , lift each other up , have each other 's back ?
This country is really a place that people dream and build together .
With us in Philadelphia were so many wonderful people who told their stories .
If you saw them during the convention , you heard the bravery , the determination .
That , to me , is the best of America .
Whatever position one holds , whatever kind of background one has , getting up every day trying to make the most out of your own life , trying to get your family to go through barriers and obstacles to make the most out of theirs , reaching out to neighbors , being part of this dream that we all share the American dream is not limited , my friends .
The American dream is as big as we make it .
And with your help , we 're going to make it bigger than ever .
Let 's go win in November . Thank you and God bless you .
TIM KAINE : Hey , guys . Man , this is great .
Wow . This is great . Hey , were we worth the wait ?
Were we worth the wait ? Yeah , absolutely . It is thank you for giving us this great shot of energy .
Hello to the Valley . Hello to Ohio . We 're so glad to be here on our bus tour .
We 've come out of a spectacular Democratic Convention in Philadelphia , and we 're glad to be in Ohio .
There 's a reason why traveling through Pennsylvania and Ohio comes first .
It 's because you guys are so critical to the outcome of this election .
And I can't tell you how proud we are to be here with you .
Thank you for this warm , warm Ohio welcome . We had great UAW introducers , Glenn and Robert .
We are so glad to be here with your formed governor and future senator , Ted Strickland .
We served together ; he 's a huge , huge hero of mine .
You 've got one of the best congress members of the United States Congress , Tim Ryan .
Give it up for him . Give it up for Tim .
And then your state senator , who is the lead Dem in the Ohio legislature , who told me that he was going to get us the best pizza in Ohio for the bus on the way after tonight .
Give it up for Joe Schiavoni . This has been a long day and a fun day , and I am so glad to be here with my wife , Anne , who until a few days ago was the secretary of education in Virginia .
But my wife Anne walked into the office Monday , before we went to the convention , and resigned so she could be full-time on the trail to make sure Hillary Clinton is elected our next president .
And how great is this to be campaigning with President Clinton ?
I mean I started my career in elected office 22 years ago , and I 've learned more on the bus in the last eight hours about politics than I 've learned in 22 years .
We have had a wonderful , wonderful time . It has been a great week , and I tell you , when Hillary Clinton called me at 7:32 last Friday night I mean , who 's counting ?
7:32 -ish last Friday night and asked if I would be her running mate in this history-making campaign in an incredibly important time in our country , I just can't tell you how humbled it made me excited , but humbled too .
I mean , this is just a remarkable woman , a remarkable leader , the most qualified person .
As President Obama said the other night when he spoke wasn't his speech fantastic Wednesday night ?
As he said the other night when he spoke , Hillary Clinton is the most qualified person to head a ticket of any party for a long time , and probably ever .
And so of course I was honored ; as somebody who 's been a mayor and a governor and Senator , I was honored to say I would love to be on this ticket to help this most qualified person be the next president and to help tackle one challenge after the next and keep America moving forward with an optimistic and patriotic view of this country .
Of course I 'm going to do it . But there was one other reason that made me very , very excited .
As we stood out on the stage together on Thursday night after she gave that magnificent speech following that fantastic introduction by Chelsea as we stood out on that stage together with balloons falling and the history of electing nominating the first woman of a major party to be our nominee , my 81-year-old mom , Kathy , was with me out on stage ; Anne and my whole family , my mom and dad were there .
And my mom looked at me as the balloons were falling and said , Tim , this is the best night of my life . '
And I 'll tell you why . We 're backing Hillary because she 's the most qualified person to be president , but we can add to our excitement a little bit because I just was reflecting , as my mom said that , the number of strong women who have supported me through my 22-year political career Anne supporting me just as I 've supported her in her career .
But think about thinking about all the campaign managers and volunteers and finance directors and staff and voters , and the majority of the American electorate is women , and by far the majority of the electorate to vote for Democrats is women , and I have always been able to be in leadership positions because strong women were willing to support me .
And I think it 's just about time , after like 240-plus years after about 240-plus years .
I think it 's time . I think it 's time .
I think it 's time for strong men to show that they can support strong women in leadership positions , including the president of the United States .
It 's just about time . It 's just about time .
So everything about this week has been great except one thing .
Now , I mean , everything 's been great . Until I joined the ticket , I was under the radar screen and Donald Trump wasn't saying anything bad about me .
I mean , he wasn't threatened by me , so he didn't have to say anything bad about me .
But as soon as I got onto the ticket , Donald Trump had to come up with something to blast me about .
So let me tell you what he said . The morning after I accepted the nomination of our party , the oldest party in the world , the Democratic Party , to be vice presidential nominee , Donald Trump said about me ,
That Kaine , he was a lousy governor of New Jersey . '
I mean , I guess I was a lousy governor of New Jersey .
I mean , I don't have the thick skin that Hillary Clinton has built up during the campaign , so that kind of affected me .
I was kind of feeling bad about it , and then I realized , wait a minute , I was never governor of New Jersey .
I 've never lived in New Jersey . But look , you 've got to give Donald a break .
He 's new to this thing . So 50 states , and Virginia is different than New Jersey .
I mean , okay , so he doesn't understand much ; this whole thing is a big civics lesson for him .
But he wants to be president , so go figure .
I mean , go figure . We have been on this tour because what we want to do is talk about something really important : how to make sure that our economy grows and [ ] for a few , but for everybody .
Now , you all [ ] this . Hillary Clinton and I both grew up in small business families .
She 'll probably talk about her dad 's business , a drapery and printing fabric factory in Chicago .
I grew up working in my dad 's manufacturing business , an ironworker-organized union shop in the stockyards of Kansas City welding and ironworking .
And it was five employees in a bad year , eight employees in a good year , plus my mom , plus my brothers and me .
The old thing , if you 're in a family business , if there 's an order that has to go out then the kids are working on weekends or the kids are coming in on holidays or summers , and that 's what we did .
So we come out of a small business background , though , and that 's where jobs get created .
And we 're here to talk about in Youngstown and in Pennsylvania earlier today and yesterday how to grow the economy for all .
And this is on the economy , this thing is super simple .
Super simple . Do you guys want [ ] a you 're fired ' president or a you 're hired ' president ?
I thought so . I thought that would be the answer .
I mean , you know that Trump 's the you 're fired ' guy .
These are the two words that he is most known for .
And I 've got a prediction : after this whole campaign is over and after Donald Trump has lost and after people have forgotten everything about the race he ran , the two words they will remember about Donald Trump is ,
You 're fired!' Hillary has been just laying out the details and talking about a
you 're hired ' economy , a job-growth economy . So it 's skills training , and it 's tax reform .
Right now we have a tax code that loves investors and hates workers .
We 've got to flip that around . I like investors ; that 's great .
But we 've got to love workers as much or more , and that 's what she 's talking about .
We have to promote manufacturing . We 've got to promote research this great innovation .
We have to promote I mean , what about , like , wages ?
I mean , a minimum wage so you 're not under the poverty level .
Or what about the radical notion that women should make the same salary and wages as men ?
One of the best lines in my opinion that from Hillary 's speech the other night she had a lot of great lines , but one I really liked because I 'm kind of a look , I was a mayor , I was a city council person , I was a governor .
I kind of like the details about things . You know , it 's not just pie in the sky .
You 've got to tell people how you 'll do it .
And Hillary Clinton said the other night , I 've got a lot of plans with some details to it .
I feel like I ought to tell you what I 'm going to do . '
And some give me grief about that , but if it 's your kid or your business , it 's not just details .
It 's kind of a big deal . Right ? I mean , you 're entitled to know what your president wants to do before you cast a vote in the ballot box , and that 's one of the things that I love about Hillary Clinton .
The details matter . If you want to , go home and go on hillaryclinton.com, and you can see how she 'll make college debt-free , and how she 'll invest $10 billion to regrow advanced manufacturing , and how she 'll make sure that we combat bad trade deals and only accept trade deals if they 're really good for American workers , and how we 'll get to pay equity , and how we 'll raise the minimum wage .
You go on that web page , you will know how she 'll pay for it and how we 'll benefit by it .
And that 's what a presidential candidate ought to do .
On the other hand , on the Trump side , he doesn't give any details , folks .
You 're not getting any details . I mean , when he tells you ,
We 're going to be rich , ' and you ask why and he just says , believe me . '
Or , We 're going to build a wall and make Mexico pay for it , believe me . '
Well , wait a minute . Believe me . We 're going to defeat believe me . '
Don't worry , there 's nothing suspicious in my tax returns , believe me , '
Now , I know something about Ohio folks . I know you ain't gullible .
Do you really think that there 's nothing wrong with his tax returns ?
How about this : Do you think Donald Trump , if he wants to be president , should do what every presidential candidate in modern history has done and show his tax returns to the American public ?
Absolutely . Because what we 've seen , and the convention laid this out , is Donald Trump has said believe me ' to a lot of people .
Now , he 's saying it in 2016 to the American voters .
But let 's just go back before the election . He said believe me ' to a bunch of contractors who have done work for him , and then he stiffed them on paying their bills .
He said believe me ' to a bunch of employees at his companies , and then he outsourced their jobs and laid them off .
He said believe me ' to retirees who gave him money because they wanted to live in a condo community in Florida , and then they ended up losing their money , they didn't get their condos , and Trump walks away with a lot of dough .
He said believe me ' to thousands of students of Trump U . and what did they get ?
They lost their dough , and they got a certificate that wasn't worth the paper it was printed on .
When Donald Trump says believe me ' and you believe him , you 're going to get hurt .
You 're going to get hurt . And I just think we are too great a nation to put it in the hands to put it in the hands of a slick-talking , self-promoting , empty-promising , one-man wrecking crew .
We just can't do it . we just can't do it .
So can I ask you , is there anybody here in this place who believes Donald Trump ?
The guy who co-wrote his autobiography says about Donald Trump recently ,
Lying is second nature to him . ' So when he says
Believe me , ' I got this question well , here 's my attitude : I ain't believing you .
I ain't believing one word . Not one word , folks .
Not one word . Not one word . Not one word .
Not one word . Not one word . Not one but we can believe somebody who has been about helping others since she was a teenager , a Midwestern Methodist Church kid growing up inspired by a wonderful youth pastor in her church in suburban Chicago who opened up the fact that in this broad world , there are a lot of folks who need a voice , who need a friend , who need a hand .
And from that early moment , Hillary Clinton has been battling , and battling hard , for families and kids , long before she was in office .
Long before she was in office . So I said to you , do you want a you 're hired ' president or a you 're fired ' president ?
And you answered right . But I 'm going to bring up Hillary Clinton now and say the real issue is the real issue is , with Donald Trump , you get a
me first ' president . With Hillary Clinton you get a families and children first ' president .
And Ohio , I know how you 're going to pick .
We got work to do . Let 's bring a warm Ohio welcome to the next president of the United States , Hillary Rodham Clinton !
HILLARY CLINTON : Thank you ! Thank you so much !
Thank you all ! Thank you ! I got to tell you , it is so great , so great being back here with you .
I am excited about our bus trip , which started in Philadelphia , and we 've gone across Pennsylvania , and now we 're in the great state of Ohio , starting in the Mahoning Valley !
I apologize for us being late . We ran into a lot of thunderstorms , and it slowed us down .
I really appreciate all of you waiting . It means the world to us to be here with you tonight .
And there 's a big overflow crowd , and I understand they can hear us , and I want to thank them for being here as well .
I want to thank Glenn Johnson and Robert Morales for being up here to introduce us to the stage .
I am very proud to have the support and the endorsement of the UAW . I 'm also very pleased to see our long-time friend , your former governor , Ted Strickland , a decent , hard-working , committed man who I hope you will send to the United States Senate in November .
I appreciate State Senator Joe Schiavoni , and Joe , we do want that pizza .
We need that pizza . And finally , I got to tell you , I am just the biggest fan of your congressman , Tim Ryan .
How many of you saw him speak at the Democratic Convention ?
Wasn't he terrific ? Tim and I have a lot in common .
I started the Manufacturing Caucus in the Senate when I was there .
He has led the House of Representatives Manufacturing Caucus . We are both commit to bringing manufacturing back so that there is a real path to the middle class for people who help to actually make things in America again .
Tim and I also share a love for hot sauce .
And he told me there would be one up here , but Tim , somebody got to it .
It 's gone . So I 'm going to hold you to it .
I understand there 's kind of a special hot sauce that 's made right here .
Right ? Hot peppers ! [ ] Yes , I want to try that .
I told Tim some years ago that when Bill ran for President in 1992 , I read an article which said that if you ate hot peppers , it would build your immune system .
I figured , well , it 's worth a try .
I started heating hot peppers back in ' 92 . I 'm still eating them .
And I 'm still standing . And I 'm still ready to go to the White House !
Now , we 're on this bus tour to highlight what our plans are to create more good jobs and raise incomes .
And we wanted to come to Pennsylvania and Ohio because these are two states where people still make things , where people believe that it 's possible to be a builder , to make a contribution , to have a good life for your family .
So we 've been visiting factories . We 've been talking to folks , getting ideas .
And here 's what I think . I think that if you agree that our major challenge economically is to create more good-paying jobs with rising incomes and good benefits so that more people in America right here in the Mahoning Valley , across Ohio , and across our country have a chance to get ahead and stay ahead , which is the basic bargain of America that joined this campaign .
I started that Manufacturing Caucus back in the Senate because I represented New York .
And in Upstate New York some of you know because you may have traveled through there we had a lot of hard-working people who got caught up in technology , with automation , with jobs being moved out of our country .
And they deserved better . And we began to put together plans , and that 's exactly what I will do as your president .
We 're going to have the biggest job creation program since World War II .
And we 're going to invest in infrastructure , we 're going to build and maintain our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our ports , our airports , our water systems .
There is so much good work to be done in America .
And it 's not just what we can see ; not just the physical infrastructure , which is critically important .
We need a new electric grid . If we 're going to be creating renewable energy , we 've got to be able to distribute it .
We need to make sure every person , every home , every business in America has access to broadband .
Internet connectivity that will give them a chance to compete and win in the economy .
I said in Harrisburg Pennsylvania last night that that 's what I wanted to do , and I told folks that teachers had told me , just recently , there was a big national survey of teachers and you know I love teachers .
And so these teachers that were telling me that after they did this survey , they found that about 70 percent of our nation 's teachers assign homework that requires kids to use the Internet .
And I see some teachers ' heads nodding . Well , that makes perfect sense because we want our kids prepared for the future .
They 're going to live in the information age , and goodness knows , it 's going to be moving even faster .
That 's the good news . The bad news is , there are 5 million kids in America who cannot access the Internet from their homes when they 're supposed to be doing their homework .
And there are parts of every state because when I finished speaking last night , I went out , as I will later , and meet everybody , shake your hands and some of the people there told me , they said , you have no idea how bad it is in places in Pennsylvania .
We still have dial-up . A lot of places , we can't get access .
That is unacceptable . It is 2016 . We are going to finish providing broadband Internet connectivity to every place in America .
We are also going to invest in advanced manufacturing . I can't wait until I get to work with Tim Ryan and Ted Strickland and Sherrod Brown about how we 're going to do this .
We 're going to invest , we 're going to work the public and the private sectors to make sure , number one , that businesses get the support they need in order to have the kind of plant and equipment that will enable them to be more competitive .
We are going to make sure that people have the skills that they can immediately put to work .
I am a strong believer is that , yes , it 's great to get a four year college education , and we 're going to make that debt free .
But I don't believe that a four year college education should be the only path for people having a good middle class job , and a future that gives them and their kids better opportunities .
We were in Johnstown , Pennsylvania , and we were meeting with the management and the Steelworkers Union , a unionized plant , and they helped to train their people .
And then their workers are making , on average , $ 70,000 a year .
I 'm telling you , we can do this . Because there are now million jobs in America that are not being filled .
We don't have enough machinists , tool and die workers , welders , coaters .
We need more skilled people in the trades . I 've got a plan to encourage businesses to pay to train people , and to support union apprenticeship programs so that we get those skills and get ready to make a good future .
And , you know , I believe strongly that some nation is going to be the clean energy superpower of the 21st century .
I want it to be us . Because there are millions of new jobs and businesses if we do this .
So we are going to grow the economy . I 'm going to invest $10 billion in manufacturing communities like those in the Mahoning Valley .
And I 'm going to do it by defending American workers .
We are not going to let Republican governors and Republican legislatures undermine the right to join a union , undermine the right to bargain collectively .
I believe Right to Work is wrong for America , and I will stand against that effort .
And we are going to say no to unfair trade deals .
I 'm going to appoint a special trade prosecutor to go after companies and countries that undercut our businesses and are unfair to our workers .
We 're going to enforce rules of origin . We saved the American auto industry from a certain demise .
And I 'll tell you , it was the Democrats who did it , wasn't it ?
And it was the right thing to do . The American auto industry just had its best year ever last year .
Well , we 're going to keep that going . And the way we are is , we 're going to stand up for our companies and our workers , and we 're not going to let China continue to dump cheap steel into the American market .
Another way we 're going to grow the economy is by supporting small business .
You heard Tim say his dad was a small businessman .
So was mine . My father had a small business that printed fabric for draperies .
He had a what we called a print plant .
It was a kind of low ceilinged , kind of dark place in Chicago , with two really long tables .
And the way you did this because I helped him when I had to , and he needed the help you would take the fabric , you 'd put it on the long table , then you 'd take what 's called a silkscreen , and you 'd put it down , and then you 'd take the paint
you 'd pour it into the silkscreen , then you 'd take the squeegee and you 'd go from left to right , then you 'd lift it up and you 'd keep going down the table .
I know how hard he worked . And I know how many opportunities that hard work gave my family .
That 's why I take really personally what Donald Trump does to small businesses .
This is not just a campaign talking point . This is personal .
You know , because my dad did all that work he would get contracts , he 'd load the fabrics into the car , then he 'd take them he 'd provide them to the hotel or the restaurant , the office and then he expected to be paid .
I mean , that 's the way we do business , isn't it ?
I mean , my first job is I babysat . I expected to be paid .
Every job I 've had since , I expected to be paid after I did the job .
Well , apparently Donald Trump thinks he 's immune from all of those rules and requirements .
And so , person after person has come forward to say the same thing : I got the contract , I did the work , he wouldn't pay me .
I 'm talking about plumbers and painters , glass installers , marble installers , all kinds of people .
And then what happens is , you know , they do the work , they go to get paid he or his minions say ,
no , we 're not going to pay you . And , you know , it 's a kind of like , a shock what do you mean you 're not going to pay me ?
They say , if you don't like it , go sue us .
Well , if you 're a small business person , you can't afford to sue a guy who puts his name on big buildings all over the place , has a battalion of lawyers .
This man has been sued 3,500 times . He plays the odds .
A lot of people won't sue me . A lot of people will give up if they try .
So maybe at the end we 'll have to pay them 50 cents , 30 cents on the dollar . '
That is so wrong , and it is something it is something that people who have been treated like this are coming to the forefront to speak out about .
Because , you know what ? They don't want America being treated by Donald Trump the way they were treated by Donald Trump .
I looked it up : nearly 98 percent of businesses in Ohio are small business .
So again , I take this personally . We 're going to help small business .
We 're going to help get you more access to credit , cut red tape , remove obstacles so that small businesses can thrive .
But we 're not only going to grow the economy , we 're going to make the economy fairer .
Because the economy needs to work for everybody , not just those at the top .
And we need to be doing everything we can to lift more people up .
So we 're going to raise the national minimum wage .
We 're going to make it a living wage that can produce a good , solid , middle-class life .
And the fastest way to increase family incomes is to make sure women get paid for the work that we do .
Now , I 'll tell you , this is not a woman 's issue .
It 's a family issue . If you have a working mother , wife , daughter , or sister , it 's your issue .
And so therefore , finally , we 're going to put this right .
So I 'm excited about what we 're going to do to create jobs , raise incomes , grow the economy , make it fair .
And we 're going to pay for everything , I 'm telling you , and I 'm telling you how I 'm going to pay for it .
It 's pretty simple . We 're going to increase taxes on corporations , Wall Street , and the wealthy in America .
Now , that is not because I 'm against success .
We don't resent success in America . But it 's because that 's where the money is .
90 percent of the income gains have gone to the top 1 percent of Americans .
So it 's like that movie . You want to know what we 're going to do ?
We 're going to Follow the Money , and the money leads to the super wealthy and corporations and Wall Street , who need to be paying for the benefits that they have received from living in the greatest country in the world .
So as you can tell , I 'm pretty excited .
It may be late , but I 'm really jazzed up about what we 're going to do .
And I don't think the stakes could be higher . Tim told you some of the reasons why Donald Trump is offering empty promises and totally at odds with what he 's done in business , how he 's treated people .
Well , let 's just take one more example . He talks about let 's make America great , right ?
Well , he talks about putting America first , right ?
Well , then why does he make Trump suits in Mexico instead of Brooklyn , Ohio ?
Why does he make furniture in Turkey instead of Cleveland ?
Why does he make barware in Slovenia instead of Jackson , Ohio ?
Well , if you saw your great senator , Sherrod Brown , at the Democrat convention he was great .
He said he bought his suit not far from where he lives in Cleveland , bought his tie in Ohio , bought his shirt in Ohio .
Now , I don't want to stir up any rivalry with Pennsylvania but my husband is wearing a shirt that was made in Reading , Pennsylvania .
So if we 're going to make America great again , Donald Trump ought to start making things in America again .
This is going to be a very intense campaign , right ?
One hundred days from today , people are going to go vote .
Tim and Ann and Bill and I and everyone working with us , we 're going to work our hearts out , because I have to tell you this is not a normal election .
Donald Trump is not a normal presidential candidate . Somebody who attacks everybody has something missing .
I don't know what it is . I 'm not going to get into that .
But yesterday he attacked a distinguished Marine general , John Allen .
He attacked the distinguished father of a soldier who sacrificed himself for his unit , Captain Khan .
He 's attacked immigrants and women . He 's attacked people with disabilities .
It 's a long list , my friends . I don't know , maybe he doesn't have anything positive to say .
But when you run for president , it 's kind of like a giant job interview .
If you were interviewing somebody to hire and that person came in to see you and that person spent all of his time insulting and scapegoating and blaming other people , and then got up and left your office , you 'd be kind of wondering what does that person do .
I think it is fair to say he is temperamentally unfit and unqualified to be president and commander-in-chief .
And as I said Thursday night , someone who can get provoked by a tweet should not be responsible for nuclear weapons .
So here 's what I 'm asking you . We 're going to be back .
We 'll be in the Mahoning Valley . We 'll be all over Ohio .
Because I want people to understand what the choice is and how it will affect you , your job , your future .
And just yesterday , the Republican economist who advised Senator John McCain when he ran for president in 2008 , he looked at the plans that I 've put forth and he 's looked at what Donald Trump has said he wants to do , and here 's what he concluded : Under my plans , America will create at least 10 million new jobs in the first four years .
And this is not me saying it . This is not me saying it .
It 's not even a Democrat saying it . But then he goes on and says under Trump 's plans America will lose 3.5 million jobs .
So this is serious business . Yes , don't boo .
Vote . So here 's what I 'm asking . I am asking for your help in this campaign .
I want you to talk to your friends , your neighbors , your family members .
I know that there are people here in the Mahoning Valley who think they want to support Trump .
I just want you to try to have a conversation with them .
I want you to ask them please to look at the facts .
I want you to ask them to look at the stories that are coming out in the press every day about people who were stiffed , mistreated .
I want you to look at the stories of all the foreign workers that he hires .
I want you to look at where he makes the things he sells .
And then I want you to ask your friends and neighbors ,
Is this somebody who really cares about the people of the Mahoning Valley , the people of this great state ? '
And I want you to join the campaign . Here 's what you can do : Text JOIN , J-O-I-N , to 47246 or go to hillaryclinton.com .
And by the way , we are hiring organizers in Ohio , so if you 're interested , go to hillaryclinton.com and look for where we 're hiring , because we are going to reach out .
We 're going to register 3 million more people . We are going to turn everybody out to vote .
Because like I said , I want you to know what my plans are as your president and I want you to hold me accountable .
I 'm not going to sit in the White House .
I 'm going to keep traveling around America . I 'm going to come back to the Mahoning Valley .
I 'm going to sit down ; I 'm going to ask you what 's working , what 's not working .
As you heard in the convention , when I tell you I will try to help you , you can count on it , because I will do everything I possibly can to deliver results for you .
So I know the hour is late . I know you have been incredibly patient .
But I am so excited to be back here . I will be back .
My team will be back . And we want you to be part of winning this election and moving our country into the future with optimism .
Thank you . TIM KAINE : Hello , Columbus .
Wow . Man , we have had an intense week , and we roll up here , as tired as we can be , and you just gave us a shot of energy .
Whew . This is so cool . This is so cool .
Hey , let me do let me do a couple of thank-yous .
I want to thank Roger Teeters , who just did the introduction , proud Vietnam vet , proud Vietnam vet .
I think one thing we showed this week in Philadelphia is what a patriotic , upbeat , optimistic , pro-America party we are in the Democratic Party .
And you guys show us the great beauty of our country .
Wasn't Philadelphia so different than that dark and twisted convention that the Republicans put on the week before ?
I know we 've got the mayor here and Congresswoman and Governor Strickland , who is going to be a fantastic U.S. Senator .
Give them a round of applause . And I really mean that , what we said about Philadelphia .
I know we felt that the hospitality there was great , that the spirit of our Democratic family was great .
And it was such a contrast with that , kind of the dark , twisted vision that Donald Trump says is America , but , really , it 's just a tour through Donald Trump 's head .
And , folks , that 's a scary place to be , scary place to be .
But we 've had a great three-day bus tour . We get on the ticket .
We do the convention . We hop on this bus tour through Pennsylvania and Ohio , talking about job creation , talking about Hillary Clinton 's plans and what we 'll do in her administration .
This is the last stop on the tour . And it 's great to finish strong in Columbus .
I want to introduce you to my wife , Anne Holton , who is my wife of 32 years .
We 're proud parents of three . She was the Secretary of Education in Virginia until last Monday .
After I was asked by Secretary Clinton to be a running mate , Anne walked in and said , I want to campaign full-time for this ticket . '
She stepped down from her position . And having her on the road with me makes me a very happy warrior .
She is a great public servant . And then we 've also had the great benefit up until the events this morning of having another travel buddy during the bus tour , President Bill Clinton .
Now , that 's pretty cool . That 's pretty cool .
I said yesterday that I 've been in politics for 22 years .
Mr. Mayor , I was a city councilman and mayor before I was a governor and senator , started at the local level .
I thought I knew something about politics after 22 years , but spending about 15 minutes on a bus with Bill Clinton , you realize , man , now , there 's a guy who knows some things about politics .
It was really exciting for Anne and I to be on this tour .
AUDIENCE MEMBER : You 're going to be our next VP , Tim .
TIM KAINE : Thank you . Thank you . But I will also say I just I am so proud to be on this ticket .
I am proud I am proud that Hillary Clinton , out of a number of spectacular people who could have been her running mate , asked , Tim , will you do this with me ? '
I 'm so humbled about it . I 'm so excited to work with somebody who , as President Obama said the other night , has got to be the best qualified person to be a nominee for President of the United States in a very long time .
So I 'm proud and we 're having fun , but I 'll just go one more reason that I 'm excited about this .
One more reason I 'm excited to say a couple things about the race and out opponent , and then introduce Hillary Clinton .
This is a historic election . This is a historic nomination .
And I was standing on the podium Thursday night after Hillary did her acceptance speech and the balloons started falling .
My 81-year-old mother and my wife were standing there with me .
My mom Kathy put her arms on my shoulders and said ,
This is the happiest moment of my life . '
Of my life . ' Now , there was a lot of reasons she was saying that , but I 'll tell you one of the reasons is this : because we were making history not just by nominating the best-qualified major party nominee in a very long time if ever , but we were also nominating that the first woman to be president .
And here 's what I thought of , here 's what I thought of : How many strong women have helped me in 22 years in politics , been campaign managers for me , campaign staffers , volunteers , member of my cabinet , supporting me , so that I could have a great political career , my wife supporting me so I could have a great political career , just like I 've supported her in her public service career .
But if you look at that whole arc of American history , how many strong women have stood behind strong men leaders ?
I think it 's time for the strong men of America to show that we can stand up and support a strong woman president of this country , of this country .
Now AUDIENCE : Hillary , Hillary , Hillary !
TIM KAINE : Hillary ! AUDIENCE : Hillary , Hillary , Hillary , Hillary !
TIM KAINE : Can I be honest and just tell you the one bad thing about this week ?
I mean , I 've got to be honest . Before I was on the ticket , Donald Trump didn't have any reason to call me a name .
So when I got on the ticket , he had to figure out how to call me a name .
So the morning after I became the nominee he did a press conference , and he took a mike and he said that Tim Kaine , he was a really lousy governor of New Jersey .
Now , I 'm a sensitive guy ; I don't like criticism .
And so I kind of felt bad until I realized , wait a minute , I was never governor of New Jersey .
I 've never even lived in New Jersey . But look , guys , give Donald a break ; he 's new to this .
He 's new to this . You know the basic civics , there 's 50 states and Virginia is different than New Jersey .
I 'm sure that 's in the briefing book a few pages later , he 's not there yet .
Look , we 're on this tour and we 're having fun , but it 's about something real serious , which is about the American economy and how to grow it , because Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump have real different plans .
I like making things simple so I 'm going to make it simple .
Would you rather have a You 're fired ' president or a
You 're hired ' president ? I thought so . I thought so .
And I predict this : After Donald Trump loses this race , and after everybody has forgotten virtually everything about his candidacy , the one thing people will remember about Donald Trump is two words :
You 're fired . ' You 're fired . '
Hillary has is going to be a You 're hired ' president and she 's going to talk a little bit about what we 've been both talking about and learning about on the trail with factory stops and rallies .
The American economy was in a freefall at the end of the Bush administration .
President Obama has pulled it out , and we 're climbing again .
But we got a long way to go . We got a long way to go because we need to grow jobs and make sure that the growth is not just for a few , but that the growth is shared by all .
And so to do that , Hillary 's got a very dynamic plan about how to grow our economy and grow it for all .
It involves skills training . It involves major investment in advanced manufacturing .
It involves infrastructure . It involves debt-free college so people can get the skills that they need to be successful .
It involves things that should be just basic , like raising the federal minimum wage so you can't work full-time and be below the poverty level .
And it also means making sure that women are entitled to equal pay for equal work .
Now , these are the basics of the Hillary Clinton
You 're hired ' plan . And guess what ? She is respectful enough of y'all
I don't know , do you use that in Columbus ?
Yeah , okay . Am I okay ? She is respectful enough of the voters to share the details .
You go on hillaryclinton.com . One click of a mouse , you can see how she 'll do it , how she 'll pay for it , how she 'll benefit .
Right ? And she said this the other night at the convention .
I liked this line . She said , I 'm going to give you the details . '
Some people criticize the details . Oh , I don't want to know about the details . '
But here 's what she said . If it 's about your kid , if it 's about your family , if it 's about your business , it ain't a detail .
It 's a big deal . It 's a big deal . '
And she 's going to share the plan . Go over to the other side of the aisle .
Donald Trump ? No plans , folks . No plans .
I mean , he talked for 75 minutes at the convention , criticized Hillary Clinton , and made a lot of big , broad claims without any substance behind them .
In fact , if you ask Donald a question , he 'll say ,
I 'm going to create jobs , ' or , We 're going to all be rich , ' or , We 're going to beat ISIS , ' or , We 're going to build a wall and make Mexico pay for it . '
And you ask him , Well , how are you going to do any of those things ? '
And he just says , Believe me . ' Believe me . '
Huh . Believe me . Believe me . ' But here 's the problem .
A lot of people have believed Donald Trump and gotten stiffed , gotten hurt , gotten there 's a lot of stories of contractors .
Hillary Clinton and I both grew up in families where our dads ran small businesses .
Her dad ran a drape and fabric-printing factory , and my dad ran an ironworker-organized welding shop .
And so we 're used to businesses . A whole lot of small businesses have done deals with Donald Trump to help him build golf courses , build casinos , et cetera , only to get stiffed after the job was done .
They did the work . They were entitled to the pay .
But Donald and his phalanx of lawyers said , We 're not paying you .
Sue us . We 'll run you into the ground .
Even if you win , you 'll pay so much in lawyers ' fees it won't be worth anything . '
They got hurt , and many of them lost their businesses because they believed Donald Trump .
Retirees in Florida , hundreds of them , gave Trump money to build them condos , and they never go the condos , and they never got the money .
They got burned and lost part of their savings because they believed Donald Trump .
Students I know . Hey , look , Columbus is a big town for students .
Right ? Big town for college . So young people like vets and others who wanted to advance , Donald Trump said ,
Hey , give me a bunch of dough and be part of my Trump University .
And then I 'll just guarantee you 'll have a path paid for success in your life . '
And they gave him a lot of money , and they ended up with a certificate that wasn't even worth the paper it was written on .
They got ripped off all because they believed Donald Trump .
And so now he 's just saying , Oh , I 'll do all these things , believe me , ' but we are just too great a nation to believe a guy who 's ripped off virtually everybody he 's come in contact with .
We cannot put a nation as great as the United States in the hands of an empty-promising , self-promoting , one-man wrecking crew .
We just can't do it , folks . We just can't do it .
And so I want to ask you a question , and I hope you 'll ask everybody this question , and that is this : When Donald Trump says , Believe me , ' does anybody here I mean even come close to believing this guy ?
I mean , do you believe even one word of what he says ?
That 's my attitude . Not one word . Not one word , folks .
Not one word . And that 's what we 've got to do on this trail , convince others that they shouldn't be so gullible to fall for Trump 's no-details promises , either .
Okay . Look . Now it is my great pleasure .
We 've had fun on these couple of days . And I hope you 'll keep us in your thoughts and encouragement and prayers .
It 's 100 days to Election Day . And Anne and I get the virtue of just joining with like 105 days left .
Now , this has been like an 18-month or multi-year effort on Hillary Clinton 's side .
But it 's going to be tough . It 's going to be challenging .
But nothing important in life is meant to be easy .
And Democrats know tough , folks , and Ohioans know tough .
So let me introduce to a great leader , a tough leader , a compassionate leader , and the next president of the United States , my friend Hillary Clinton .
HILLARY CLINTON : Hello , Columbus . I am just so happy to be here on this absolutely glorious , beautiful Ohio afternoon .
And I am so glad to be making this journey with Senator Tim Kaine and Anne Holton because they understand what public service is all about .
They are committed to doing everything they can as Tim has , starting on city council , mayor , lieutenant governor , governor , and now senator to give people the best chance they can to get ahead and stay ahead .
So please join me again in thanking Senator Tim Kaine .
And Mayor Ginther , we 're happy to be here in your beautiful capital city here in Columbus .
And I don't know how you all felt , but boy , I thought your congresswoman really knocked it out of the park at the convention .
I haven't even had time to tell Joyce this , but I think it might have been on the very first night she was sitting in the box with my husband , sitting right next to him .
And all of a sudden , Twitter was going crazy ,
Who is that beautiful , well-dressed , elegant woman sitting next to Bill Clinton ? '
And finally , somebody says , That 's the congresswoman from Ohio , ' and I was so proud to have her support .
Now , there 's somebody else with us , somebody very special to us , somebody special to Ohio , your former governor , Ted Strickland .
I 've had the great privilege of knowing Ted for decades .
I 've seen how hard he has worked . He got dealt a bad hand being governor during the Republican-generated Great Recession and doing everything he could to try to help Ohio and get through that .
Well , now he 's running to represent you in the Senate .
I think your other great senator , Sherrod Brown , deserves a partner .
Every time Sherrod stands up and fights for you , he needs a partner to do the same and not have his vote canceled out .
So do everything you can to send Ted Strickland to the Senate in November .
Tim 's right ; we 've had a great time .
How many of you watched the convention ? I was so proud to see Democrats standing up and speaking about what we can do together to make sure the economy works for everyone , not just those at the top , taking on the special interests that have benefited from a system that is rigged in their favor .
So when we finished those four days , I was thrilled to get on that bus in Philadelphia and head out across Pennsylvania and into Ohio .
And along the way , we stopped at factories , where hardworking Americans are still making things .
We stopped at a factory in Johnstown , Pennsylvania , where business and management works with the steel workers who are there represented by their union fighting hard to have more good jobs .
They told me how they are bringing jobs back from China , how they 're creating more opportunity .
That 's the American story that we 're going to be telling during this campaign during these last 100 days .
I have specific plans about how we 're going to get the economy working for everybody .
We are going to make the biggest investment in new jobs since World War II and put millions of Americans to work .
And here 's how we 're going to do it : We 're going to invest in infrastructure , our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our ports , our airports , our water systems .
But not just what you can physically see ; we need a new electric grid to be able to take and distribute all the clean renewable energy we 're going to be producing .
And we need to finish the job of connecting every home and business in America to high-speed broadband internet access .
I talk a lot about building our economy , getting jobs for everyone .
Well , it 's a little heartbreaking to learn , as I did when I was talking to some teachers a few days ago and I love teachers and the teachers told me they had just had a national survey done , and learned that 70 percent of the teachers in America assign homework to their students that required kids to go on the internet .
Now , that makes sense . We 're living in the information age .
We want more people , particularly young people , to help create that future so we have even more opportunities .
But here 's the problem : 5 million kids in America don't have access at home to high-speed internet .
So already they 're being left behind . So we 've got to build America 's competition , build America 's opportunities , and the plans that we 've laid out will do just that .
I also believe we need to do more for small business .
98 percent of the businesses in Ohio are small businesses .
Let 's have greater access to credit . Let 's be sure we cut through and eliminate any of the red tape and the other obstacles .
You heard Tim say his dad ran a small business .
So did mine . My father ran a print plant where fabrics were printed with designs for draperies .
I was there helping him , but I know how hard he worked .
And I am personally sickened when I hear the stories about Donald Trump refusing to pay plumbers and painters and marble installers and glass installers and small businesses who have done the work .
I think about my dad . He worked hard . What would have happened if the customers he had , after he printed those drapery fabrics , made them into draperies , loaded them into his car , delivered them , helped to install them , and somebody like Donald Trump said , We 're not paying you ? ' My dad would have said ,
What do you mean ? I did was I was contracted to do . '
But to person after person and business after business , Donald Trump said , I don't care . '
It 's not because he couldn't pay them . He wouldn't pay them .
He drove businesses into bankruptcy in addition to taking bankruptcy himself six times .
My friends , that 's not how we do business in America .
If you do the work , you deserve the pay .
And we 're going to stand up and make that case against Donald Trump .
The other thing about Trump you 've heard him he says , America first . '
Sounds real , doesn't it ? As if we wouldn't put America first .
That 's sure what I believe . He says it .
But then everything he makes , he makes somewhere else .
He makes dress shirts in China , not Brooklyn , New York .
He makes furniture in Turkey , not Cleveland , Ohio .
He makes barware in Slovenia , not Jackson , Ohio .
And he goes around saying he wants to put America first and American workers first .
And then just today we learn , once again , he 's asked for visas to employ foreign workers at his country clubs because he says he can't find any American workers .
Shame on you , Donald Trump . Shame on you .
Let 's cut through all of the hype and the rhetoric and understand that we 're dealing with somebody who has a history of stiffing people , making things somewhere else besides America , and whenever possible , hiring foreign workers .
I don't think that adds up in any way to making America great again .
I think it adds up to making Donald Trump more money , that 's what it 's all about .
So we 're not only going to grow the economy and create more jobs for American workers
we are going to make the economy fairer . We are going to raise the minimum wage so that nobody who works full-time will be in poverty .
And you 've heard it before , but I 'll say it again : The fastest way to raise incomes in America is to pay women equal pay for the work we do .
Now , this is not just a woman 's issue .
This is a family issue . If you 've got a working mother , wife , sister , or daughter , it 's your issue .
And we are going to enforce the laws and finally make it absolutely clear :
No more discrimination against women who work in the workplace .
So I know we 're up against some powerful forces , and here 's what I want you to know .
As you talk to your friends , your neighbors , about this election , everything I 've proposed and you can go to hillaryclinton.com and read all about it
I 've told you how I will pay for it .
How will I pay for it ? I will pay for everything I 've proposed by making the wealthy corporations and Wall Street finally pay their fair share of taxes .
Somebody asked me , well , why are you doing that ?
Do you resent success ? No , I don't resent success .
I do resent people taking advantage of other people to try to become successful .
But the reason we 're going to get the wealthy to pay is that 's where the money is .
They have earned 90 percent of all of the income gains since the recession .
That 's the top 1 percent . And I just think , like that old movie says , you 've got to follow the money .
And the money is with the super-wealthy . Now , we 're also going to do more for education , starting with preschool education .
We 're going to support our teachers in order to give them what they need to do the job we 're asking them to do .
We are going to make four-year college affordable by making it debt-free .
And we 're going to help those of you who have student debt pay it back at a lower interest rate , at a faster timetable .
And if you do public service like teaching , policing , firefighting , social work , we will forgive your debt .
This seems to me also to be fair . Donald Trump gets to refinance and forgive his debts .
Well , what about the families and students of America who get to have some help with their debts ?
So if you vote for us , that 's exactly what we 're going to do next year .
So there 's a big agenda , and I watched what 's happened over the last two weeks .
A lot of the rhetoric that came from Trump and his convention was so dark , so pessimistic , so negative .
I know we 've got problems and challenges . I 'm not taking a position that we don't have work to do .
In fact , I 'm telling you what work we can do together .
But at the end of the day , we Americans are better when we roll up our sleeves , we set some goals , and we work together , because yes , we are stronger together .
And I am very excited about what we can do .
You see , I view this campaign as a giant job interview .
I am here telling you what I want to achieve , asking for your vote , and asking you also to hold me accountable .
I want you not just to vote for me in November but help me be the best president I can be for all Americans .
I want to be the president for every American . And that 's why today Tim and I and Anne are here , because we are kicking off this campaign in Ohio .
And yes , we have a lot of other issues that we are concerned about .
I see some of the t-shirts and the signs . We will defend Planned Parenthood from these outrageous attacks .
We will defend and improve benefits under Social Security . We will take on the gun lobby for comprehensive gun safety reforms .
We will take on the real challenges that confront America , not pick fights with people , not act as though some folks are better than others , not insult and finger-point .
We 're going to stand up for Americans ' rights : for women 's rights and gay rights and voting rights and workers ' rights .
But we can't do any of this without your help .
And I 'm asking for it . We need you to get involved in the campaign .
And right now , if you will text JOIN , J-O-I-N , at 47246 or go to hillaryclinton.com, you can find out how to get involved .
And , by the way , we are hiring organizers in Ohio if you 're interested in being part of our campaign staff because at the end of this election , I want people to have made an informed choice .
I don't want folks to be misled , to listen to the rhetoric and the demagoguery .
I personally think that Donald Trump poses a serious threat to our democracy .
And it 's going to be up to all of us to repudiate the hatefulness , attacks on distinguished military leaders , like General John Allen , who came to the Democratic Convention because he loves a country that he served for more than 40 years and wanted to be clear about what he thought was best for our national security , or insulting the family of a fallen soldier , Captain Khan , an American Muslim who sacrificed his life to protect his unit and other soldiers as a taxi raced toward the gates of a base containing a bomb .
When his father spoke at the convention and pulled out a copy of the Constitution , it was so fitting that happened in Philadelphia , where our country started 240 years ago .
They enshrined in our Constitution the principle of religious liberty .
They understood that America would be including and attracting people from all over the world .
George Washington , Thomas Jefferson , they addressed different religions , including Islam , that were present in America way back at our beginning .
And I want us always to stand for freedom and equality and justice and opportunity now and forever .
Help us go out and win an election that will keep our democracy strong , our economy growing , and give every American a chance to live up to his or her God-given potential .
Thank you so much , Columbus . WARREN BUFFETT :
Thank you . Hillary ! Hillary ! Hillary ! Hillary !
Thank you . Thank you . I think you 've made it pretty clear who you 've come to hear , so I 'll In just a minute , I 'm going to talk about my favorite subject , which is going to be what Hillary can and will do in the eight years following January 20th .
But before that , there have been a couple of things said by Donald Trump in the last few weeks that I now , wait till you hear them , then you 'll really boo .
So I 'd like to clarify a little bit , and these are important points to be made and it 's important that you hear the answer on them .
The first point was when he was asked about revealing his income tax returns , which every presidential candidate has done for 40 years .
He said , None of your business , ' which did not go over so well .
And then he started giving various explanations , and one of the explanations was that he had given his financial statement to the Election Commission , they 're listed as assets and liabilities .
But believe me , as someone who 's filled out financial statements and someone who 's filled out an income tax return , I can tell you they are two very different animals .
And you will learn a whole lot more about Donald Trump if he produces his income tax return .
And so that 's why I 'd like to make him an offer an offer I hope he can't refuse .
Donald Trump at one point he says various things at different times , but at one point , and I think he said it several times he said he can't do it , can't release it because he 's under audit .
Now , I 've got news for him : I 'm under audit too .
And I would be delighted to meet him anyplace , anytime between now and election .
I will bring my tax return ; he can bring his tax return .
Nobody 's going to arrest us . It is not there are no rules against showing your tax returns .
And just let people ask us questions about the items that are on there .
How many of you would be afraid to have your tax return made public ?
Yeah , it is not no , no . You 're only afraid if you 've got something to be afraid about .
And you 're not he 's not afraid because of what of the IRS .
He 's afraid because of you . So I will meet him in Omaha , or Mar-a-Lago , or he can pick the place anytime between now and election .
I 'll bring my return ; he 'll bring his return .
We 're both under audit . And believe me , nobody 's going to stop us from talking about what 's on those returns .
And send the word to him , if you will .
Now , the another thing he said is he says America isn't great anymore .
You know , you need him . But because America just isn't great anymore .
Now , everybody is entitled to their opinion . I disagree with him violently on that subject , which I 'll say a little bit about more later .
But it 's how he explains what he would do about that , because I 'm going to quote his exact words I 'm going to read this because I want to be sure I 've got it exactly right .
He says , No one knows the system better than me , which is why I alone can fix it . '
Well , la-dee-da . You know ? I mean , this is only he can fix it .
I didn't really realize we were in such grave danger .
I mean , there 's 325 million Americans , and if this guy leaves for Canada , it 's supposed to be hopeless for the rest of us .
No , he alone can fix it . It takes some kind of nerve , or something else , to really have the notion that out of 325 million people , you 're the only one who can fix it .
Now , I think when somebody makes a statement like that , you should look at his record when he has appealed to the American public before .
Now , Donald Trump has been in a lot of businesses , he 's had a lot of bankruptcies , but usually that 's just involved borrowing money from the American public .
But in 1995 to my knowledge it 's the only time Donald Trump went to the American people and he said , Join me I 'm a winner .
Join me and invest in my company , ' Trump hotels and casino resorts .
It 's the only time he asked the public to join , but now you got a chance to join the great man in this investment .
That was in 1995 . They listed on the New York Stock Exchange , and Mr. Trump very modestly made the ticker symbol DJT . Guess what that 's for ?
So he names the company after himself , or he gets the ticker symbol after himself .
In the next 10 years , the company loses money every year every single year .
The he takes out $44 million in compensation during that period .
If you in 1995 , when he offered this company , if a monkey had thrown a dart at the stock page , the monkey on average would have made 150 percent .
But the people that believed in him , that listened to his siren song , came away losing well over 90 cents on the dollar .
They got back less than a dime . And you know the history of his enterprises where he was borrowing money where one time after another , he went into bankruptcy .
I 've really never known another businessman that brags about his bankruptcies .
I mean , and it to tell you the truth , why not ?
I mean , it 's his claim to stardom . I don't know anybody else that 's had six bankruptcies , but there he is .
Now , the final straw occurred this weekend , and you know about it .
Donald Trump managed to get in front of George Stephanopoulos after Mr. and Mrs. Khan had told about their Gold Star son , and Mr. Khan had offered him a Mr. Trump a copy of the Constitution .
And Donald Trump said this when asked by George Stephanopoulos about Well , Mr. Khan first said you have sacrificed nothing and no one . '
Quite an accurate statement . And Trump said , I think I 've made a lot of sacrifices .
I 've worked very , very hard . I 've created thousands of jobs , tens of thousands of jobs , built great structures .
I 've had tremendous success . ' And George , a little overcome , said , Those are sacrifices ? '
And Trump , believe it or not , said ,
Oh , sure . I think they 're sacrifices . '
Now , the young son of Mr. and Mrs. Khan died a dozen or so years ago .
In that dozen of years , we 've employed a lot of people .
I 've had fun doing it . We 've made money just like Donald Trump has made .
I have made no sacrifice . No member of my family has gone no member of the Buffett family has gone to Iraq or Afghanistan .
No member of the Trump family has gone to Iraq or Afghanistan .
We 've both done extremely well during this period , and our families haven't sacrificed anything , and Donald Trump and I haven't sacrificed anything .
But how in the world can you stand up to a couple of parents who have lost a son and talked about sacrificing because you were building a bunch of buildings ?
I mean , that is when I heard that , my mind went back and this goes back before most of you were born but they went back to the McCarthy hearings .
And at the time of the McCarthy hearings at the time of the Senate McCarthy hearings with the Army , Joe Welch had a young assistant of his maligned by Senator McCarthy , and McCarthy went on and on , and implying this guy was a communist and doing all kinds of things .
And finally Joe Welch couldn't take it anymore and he said , and I 'll quote him ,
Have you no sense of decency , sir ? ' And I ask Donald Trump , have you no sense of decency , sir ?
I might add I 'd just add one thing .
McCarthy 's career went straight downhill after that . Let 's move on to more pleasant subjects .
Unlike what Mr. Trump says , America is great . Yes .
So let 's talk about the USA . Because 240 years ago , we started with a piece of paper .
It was a blueprint for a new society a society unlike anything the world had ever seen before .
And in 1776 , that blueprint started us on a path that has finally led to the next woman president .
It was imperfect , but it was aspirational . Now , that blueprint has done wonders for this country in terms of overall prosperity .
When I was born in 1930 , if my parents had seen what the world would look like in 2016 , they wouldn't have believed it .
The GDP per capita is six times what it was when I was born .
That 's never happened in the history of mankind . It 's a miracle .
And the miracle is America . And it still has all the qualities that it had in 1930 , and which propelled us forward like this .
So America , in terms of delivering wealth , has been incredible .
In terms of distributing wealth , it has not been living up to what I consider its potential .
I just described to you $ 56,000 of GDP per capita , and that means a family of four , on average , would have $ 224,000 of GDP per capita .
But it hasn't worked out that way . This country , while making some people enormously wealthy , has left people behind .
And those people were just a willing , probably more willing , to go to Afghanistan .
And in Hillary Clinton , you have somebody that cares about that .
Let me give you just one more statistic and I 'll get away from that .
I know how popular that is . But in the first year of the Forbes 400 back in the 1980s , the aggregate wealth of the 400 was $93 billion .
You can look it up on the internet . Currently , it 's $ 2,374,000,000 .
That 's 25 for 1 . Now , I 'd like everybody that 's had 25 for 1 themselves , if they 'd raise their hand .
Yeah . It hasn't happened . They told us it would trickle down .
Yeah . But what has happened what has happened is it 's flooded upward .
And that almost $2.4 trillion , from 400 people in this country , they 're not bad people .
I know a good many of them . I 'd like to know more , actually .
But they have benefitted from the system that , frankly , tilted toward people like me and the rest of that group .
I mean , it 's not because they 're evil , but they 've taken advantage .
They 're the ones with the lobbyists . They 're the ones that come up with carried interest where their income is taxed at rates far lower than almost all of the people in this room .
And it 's going to take somebody with strength , resoluteness , brains , energy it 's going to take that to somebody to effect change .
I mean , there 's no question about that . It won't happen by itself .
It takes guts . It is a tough , tough job when you try and change the code on people that are making millions and billions of dollars a year in order to give a better break to the people who work just as hard , maybe harder , and take home a few hundred dollars a week .
It 's really wrong that in a country where there 's $ 56,000 of GDP per person for anybody that works 40 hours a week not to be able to rely on a decent living for their family .
It just doesn't make any sense . And it won't cure itself , and it certainly won't be cured with Donald Trump .
It 's going to take Hillary Clinton . It 's going to take powers of persuasion .
It 's going to take a mandate from the people in their election .
But she 's spelling out what she 's going to do , as contrasted to one of the other candidates .
She is telling you what she is going to do about the tax code .
And when that gets enacted , I 'll be a little worse off , and believe me , I can take it .
And you 'll be better off . Now I 'd like to make a little news .
And this is a surprise even to Hillary . It 's very easy there were 129 million votes cast in the last presidential election .
It 's very easy to think , if you 're watching a TV show or the weather 's a little bad or something , to think , well , my vote really doesn't count .
What difference is it going to make with 129 million ?
Well , I 've got some real news for you .
It doesn't make much difference if you 're a Democrat in Idaho or a Republican in California .
I mean , you are in a state where the electoral vote 's going to be decided by majority vote , and you 're on the short side in that case .
But we live in a very special place . In Nebraska and Maine , we also cast electoral votes by congressional district , and we don't have to think about 129 million popular votes throughout the country ; we have to think about 538 electoral votes .
And yesterday on that same George Stephanopoulos show they had four people predicting how the election would come out .
And Jonathan Karl of ABC News had gone state by state and come up with he came up with his notion as to who was going to carry each state and how that would cause the electoral vote to come out .
And those of you who watched the show yesterday saw that he came out 269 to 269 .
He absolutely said that he did not try to come out that way , he just looked state by state 269 to 269 .
Now , there 's one district in the United States
I am looking at the people that can change that 269 to 270 .
It happened in 2008 by 3,200 or 3,325 votes by this .
We actually gave a vote separate than the rest of Nebraska .
So it 's been done . It 's been done .
But we 're going to help that process along this time .
I have pledged today that on Election Day , November 8th , I will take at least 10 people to the polls who would otherwise have difficulty getting there .
And when you go home tonight , you can go to a website called Drive2 that 's for the 2nd Congressional District
, it 's the number 2 Drive2Vote , and if you go there , it will offer you information on three things : how to register ; how , if you need a ride on November 8th , you may find someone who will take you , will take care of that ; and it 'll also give you the chance to volunteer to take some people , whether it 's 10 or a lesser number .
Today , I reserved Ollie the Trolley for November 8th .
It seats 32 . I 'm going to be on it all day .
I 'm going to do selfies whatever it takes .
And if it 's snowing , if it 's cold , my goal and the goal of the people who 've joined me on this in this drive to vote my goal is to have the turnout in Douglas-Sarpy Counties , the 2nd District , is to have the turnout here be the highest percentage of potential voters of any district in the country .
Let 's Let 's give America a civics lesson .
How about it ? Everybody in the 2nd District , yeah ?
And if the people in this room , each one of you would pledge to take 10 people , that I can almost guarantee that 'll be the march of the victory .
So join me . If you can take 20 , do that .
If you can only take three or four , that 's fine too .
But get that neighbor who is watching that television program or [ ] and shame him into coming with you to the polls .
Now , just remember , Drive2Vote . Okay . Now , if you 've read the Constitution , which apparently some people haven't if you read Article II , it deals with the presidency .
Article II of the Constitution , look it up . That 's where they describe the presidency .
We wrote that Constitution ; 39 men signed it . How would you ever guess ?
You 'll find out in a minute . Thirty-nine men signed it , and in Article II , describing the qualifications for the president of the United States , male pronouns he , ' his ' and him ' were used 20 times .
Just imagine that . And it 's still in the Constitution 227 years later .
He , ' his ' and him . ' No hers , ' no shes . '
Well , on January 20th , we 're going to elect the best president we 've ever had , and somebody is going to change those pronouns : Hillary Rodham Clinton !
HILLARY CLINTON : Wow ! Thank you . Thank you all so much .
Wow . Thank you . Thank you . Thank you , Omaha .
Thank you . Thank you , Congressional District 2 . I am so delighted to be back here with so many friends and supporters , and with everyone here today .
And especially , I want to thank Warren Buffett for that kind and generous introduction .
I 've heard Warren called the Omaha Oracle . I call him my friend .
He is an American original . I am honored to have his support , and I love the idea that together all of you are going to aim to have the highest percentage turnout of any congressional district in America .
It 's great to be here at the North High School the Magnet School .
I had a chance to say hello to your principal , Gene Haynes .
And I see scattered throughout the crowd both students and teachers , and I love teachers .
Thank you . I also wanted to thank a former colleague of mine in the United States Senate , your former Senator , Ben Nelson .
I have to tell you , I 've had the best week .
Any of you watch the convention ? I was so excited to have the opportunity for so many people who care about our country , who have contributed in many different ways , to have a chance to stand before America , and to tell their stories .
Because America is story after story . And what I want is to provide the opportunity and the support so that every single American can live his or her best story , can make the most of your own God-given potential .
And after the convention was over , starting Friday morning , Tim Kaine and his wonderful wife Anne and Bill and I got on a bus and started traveling across Pennsylvania , into Ohio ; we visited factories , small towns , bigger cities .
We met with so many hard-working people who told us their stories .
And they proved every day that Donald Trump is wrong .
America is not weak . I agree with Warren . This is the greatest nation on earth , and our best days are still ahead of us .
Now , that doesn't mean we don't have challenges and problems .
Of course we do . Right here at home and around the world .
But I don't believe there is anything that Americans can't do if we make up our minds , because , you know why ?
We are stronger together . But as Warren said , too many people haven't gotten a raise since the great crash .
There 's too much inequality and too little opportunity . Washington is paralyzed by special interests and big money .
But don't let anyone tell you we don't have what it takes if we make up our minds to solve our problems .
And don't believe anyone who tells you , I alone can fix it . '
When Donald Trump said that in his convention speech , I did a bit of a mental double take .
I listened to that speech , 75 minutes of it , and it was like he was talking about a different country .
Forgetting about everyone in America who gets up every day and works together .
People who make a difference every single day . He 's forgetting our troops on the front lines , he 's forgetting police officers and firefighters who run toward danger .
He 's forgetting about doctors and nurses who save lives , and teachers who change lives .
He 's forgetting about unions who fight for working families , and communities that pull together through hard times .
I grew up in the Midwest . I was born in Chicago , raised outside of Chicago .
My dad was a small businessman . I mean , really small .
It was mostly just him and occasionally my mother , my brothers , and me .
And sometimes he 'd hire helpers to get one of his orders out , because he printed fabrics to be made into draperies .
And he had a print plant with long tables . He was a very self-reliant man .
But I don't think he , for a minute , through his growing up in Scranton , Pennsylvania , through his service as a chief petty officer in the Navy , through his work in business or his raising our family , ever thought to himself ,
I alone can fix it . ' That 's just not the way we were raised .
We were raised to get together . We were raised to follow up on the extraordinary example of our founders 240 years ago , in Philadelphia , who came together .
You see that across Nebraska . You see people working .
I 've been in Omaha . I have visited projects , schools , other kinds of nonprofits and institutions where people are working together .
That 's what we do in America . We see a problem and we say , We 'll fix it together . '
And that 's what we 're going to do when we get the White House to move us forward in the direction we need to go .
Now , I know how hard the great recession was .
It was a terrible time . The worst financial crisis since the Great Depression .
And people in Nebraska worked hard to come back . I think it was a terrible moment .
It could 've gotten even worse . I believe that a lot of difficult decisions had to be made .
And we have come back from that terrible financial crisis .
Thanks to the hard work of Nebraskans , Americans , and President Obama , we got out of the ditch we were in .
So I think if we 're going to solve the problems we have , we ought to be really clear about where we 've come from .
We now have 15 million new jobs that have been created in the last 7 years .
We now have 20 million more Americans who have access to healthcare .
We have the highest percentage ever in our history of young people walking across graduation stages to get their high school diplomas .
So I know we 've made progress , but I know we shouldn't be satisfied .
As Americans , we always have to be asking ourselves , what can we do better ?
How can we make more progress ? How can we help more people ?
We 're still facing tough challenges that developed long before the recession , and they 've stayed with us .
The economy is not working the way it should for everyone .
Starting in Iowa back in April 2015 , until the convention this week , I have met so many people who tell me , you know , they don't expect a handout .
They don't even expect , you know , life to be easy .
But they don't think it should be this hard . It shouldn't be that people feel like they 're out there on their own , like no one cares about them , that they 're not respected .
That the dignity of their job is not something that we all support .
I know a lot of people who feel that way .
I bet there are some in this gymnasium who feel that way .
Well , here 's what I want you to know : You deserve a president who will get up every single day in the White House and do everything she can to give you the chance you deserve to have .
And I will quickly add , as important as it is to have someone who gets what you 're going through , I think it 's also really important that that person tells you what her plans are for producing results .
So if you saw what I said on Thursday night , let me give you the short , punchier version .
And it starts by making clear , we do have to rewrite the rules so that our economy works for everyone , not just those at the top .
My overriding mission as president will be to do everything I can to help our country create more jobs with rising income .
I believe anyone willing to work hard should be able to find a job that pays well enough to support a family .
So in my first 100 days , we are going to break through the gridlock in Washington and make the biggest investment in new , good-paying jobs since World War II . We are going to make the boldest investment in American infrastructure since the highway system .
Warren read you some of the quotes from Donald Trump .
Well , he has said so many things that I profoundly , vehemently disagree with .
And for the life of me , I don't know why someone runs to be president of the United States who thinks and says , we never win anymore .
Our country is full of losers . Well , he could not be more wrong .
We are going to fix and build the roads , the bridges , the tunnels , the ports , the airports , the water systems we need .
And I want to say a particular word to any of you here from rural Nebraska .
We 're going to bring diverse economic development to rural communities to support our farmers and others in small towns who keep America going .
And one specific way we will do that is to make sure we have an electric grid that can take and distribute energy from clean , renewable sources .
In fact , I know , because I 've seen them in the crowd , there are a few people from Iowa here today .
And your neighbor Iowa is already getting one third of its electricity from clean energy , primarily wind energy .
And what I love about that is , they 're also giving farmers extra income for hosting the turbines on their farm , and they are taking abandoned factories and actually assembling the wind turbines , putting people to work in Iowa to produce the energy in Iowa .
The other thing we 're going to do is finish the job of building out broadband so everybody in America , no matter where you live , has access to the Internet .
I don't know how we build a 21st-century economy for our young people if we don't give every home and business access to high-speed Internet connectivity .
And I learned something from talking to some of my teacher friends as I said , I do love teachers , and I 'm going to work with you to support you .
And here 's what they told me . They told me that a recent survey found 70 percent of our teachers give homework assignments to their students that require them to use the Internet .
Now , that makes perfect sense . We want to have a really great opportunity for young people to understand how to be involved with and use the Internet .
But here 's the rub . We have 5 million kids in America who don't have access to the Internet in their homes .
So already they 're being left out and left behind .
We don't have a child to waste . We need every child to be given an education to prepare them for the future .
So , to me , it 's real simple . If we invest in infrastructure , we 're going to put millions of people to work , and we 're going to lay the foundation for new jobs in the future .
The second thing we 're going to do is invest in American manufacturing .
And here 's why . A lot of people say , you know , we can't make things in America anymore .
And they think about all of the jobs we 've lost because of low wage labor and other problems .
Well , here 's what I have seen and I 've seen it all over America
I was just in a plant in Johnstown , Pennsylvania .
A wire plant called Johnstown Wire Technologies . And I was talking
it 's a plant that 's been there more than 100 years .
Started off as a steel plant . Now it 's making wire products .
And I was talking to them , and I said , well , what kind of future do you think you have ?
And they said , boy , if we get the right support , we 've got a great future .
We 're actually bringing jobs back from China to Johnstown , Pennsylvania .
When I was your Secretary of State , I visited 112 countries , and I went to a lot of places that really want American-made products .
They 're the best , the most innovative . Nobody can outwork or outcompete American workers or American businesses .
So what I want to do I want to support manufacturers , large and small .
And again , I hear Trump talking a big game about
I think he says , putting America first . Well , I don't know what part of America first ' leads him to make Trump furniture in Turkey , not Nebraska .
Or Trump ties in China , not Colorado . Or Trump barware in Slovenia , not Ohio .
He says he wants to make America great again . Well , he could start by actually making things in America again .
And then just this week we find out he 's asking for permission to get visas to bring more foreign workers , which he has used consistently , to work in his country clubs , on his golf courses .
And he was asked , I think , on that same interview Warren was talking about he goes , oh , well , it 's very hard to find people .
Well , I bet together we could find thousands of people who would like to work at a country club or on a golf course in America .
We 're also going to take seriously the education and training of our young people , and people in midcareer .
We 're going to invest in STEM education , which is part of the mission here .
I want us to provide to every student in America the chance to learn computer science like you 're doing here at OmahaNorth High School .
We are going to partner with the private sector to train up to 50,000 computer science teachers over the next decade , so they 're in the classroom preparing our young people .
We 're also going to make college tuition free for the middle class , and debt-free for everybody .
And we will liberate millions of people who already have student debt .
It is just not fair that Donald Trump takes bankruptcy six times to get out from under his debts , and we won't let families and students refinance their student debt .
And here 's something else . I don't think we say this enough .
College is crucial , but a four-year degree should not be the only path to a good job in America .
Right now , there are millions of job openings . We don't have enough machinists or welders or coders .
We need more skilled people in the trades because a lot of the people who know how to do that work are going to be retiring in the next 10 or 15 years .
That 's why I want to support more business and union apprenticeship initiatives , targeted higher education programs , more training .
We 're going to help people build a better future .
And , finally , we are going to support the kind of small businesses that Donald Trump has consistently stiffed .
Like I said , my dad was a very small businessman .
I take this really personally . I had no idea before he started running and information began coming to light what he has done to hurt people .
I said in the convention Atlantic City , New Jersey , hardworking contractors , small businesses , were left holding the bag after Trump refused to pay their bills .
I 'm talking about painters , landscapers , plumbers , the people who installed the glass in his casino , the people who laid the marble floor in his casino .
They needed the money . They did the work . They bought the supplies .
And he didn't pay them , not because he couldn't but because he wouldn't .
That is just not the way you do business in America .
We make good on our promises . Well , I think about my dad standing over those big bolts of fabric .
You take a silkscreen . You put it down . You pour paint in it .
You take a squeegee . You go from one side to the other .
Then you lift it up , and you keep going down the table .
Then maybe you come back , and you add another color with a different silkscreen .
And then , finally , you finish . My dad would get contracts .
He would do the work . Then he would load the fabrics into his car , and he would take them to the places that had ordered them : hotels , offices , restaurants .
And he expected to be paid . If one of his major customers had refused , he would have been forced to close up his business .
Luckily , he never had a contract with Donald Trump .
If you hire someone to do a job and they do it , you pay them .
You don't go around bullying small businesses just because you can .
Small businesses are the backbone of this economy . And I want to be a small business president .
We 're going to make it easier to give credit , to cut red tape .
Too many dreams still die in the parking lots of banks in America .
If you can dream it , you should be able to build it .
I also will tell you exactly how I 'm going to pay for everything I have proposed .
If you go to my website , hillaryclinton.com, you can see .
It 's not complicated . It 's exactly what Warren said , Follow the money . '
And I 'm glad I 'm glad Warren is so good-humored about it because the super-rich , Wall Street and corporations , are going to start paying their fair share for supporting the United States of America .
And this is not because this is not because we resent success .
We welcome success as long as you do it fairly and don't abuse people on the way up .
But 90 percent of the income gains have gone to the wealthiest 1 percent in America .
Our tax code is full of loopholes and special breaks that make it even worse .
And what I really appreciate about Warren is he has said and he has said it consistently he should never be able to pay a lower tax rate than his secretary .
And he is right . So I have said I am going to follow Warren 's example .
Being successful doesn't have to come at the expense of others .
He knows that real value comes from helping more people invest in themselves .
Their businesses grow the economy . And so we 're going to use him and his ideas about how we 're going to tax the wealthy more as the real foundation of making the investments in America that will help everybody .
Now , I don't I 'm told that Donald Trump stays glued to the TV set .
So I hope he heard Warren . There 's always
there 's always time for a conversion because while Warren is standing up for a fairer tax code , Trump wants to cut taxes for the super-rich .
Well , we 're not going there , my friends .
I 'm telling you right now we 're going to write fairer rules for the middle class , and we aren't going to raise taxes on the middle class .
And while we 're at it , we would like to see those tax returns , wouldn't we ?
My husband and I have put out I think about 33 or 34 years ' worth if you 're interested .
He doesn't even respect the American people enough to do what every other presidential candidate has done for decades and release them .
It 's time for Trump to stop hiding . It 's time to stand up for working families .
It 's time to make clear that when the middle class thrives , America thrives .
And that 's what we 're going to get back to doing .
So , my friends , I will not rest until we get wages and incomes rising .
I will not rest until we make it clear what 's at stake in this election .
And that 's why I need your help . I just want to I want to throw into the challenge that Warren made if this congressional district has the highest percentage of votes in any congressional district and , of course , if I win , here 's what we 'll do .
I will shortly after I become president , sometime as soon as I can arrange it , come back here .
And Warren and I will dance [ ] together .
And maybe if we 're really lucky , he 'll wear his Elvis costume again .
Please join this campaign . Text JOIN , J-O-I-N . Go to 47246 .
Go to hillaryclinton.com . And , oh , by the way , we are hiring organizers in Nebraska .
So let 's have some fun . Let 's register voters .
Let 's turn people out . And let 's win this election for America 's future .
Thank you . It 's great to be here with your governor .
I am such a fan of Governor Hickenlooper for a lot of reasons , but one of the main reasons is because he does understand how we could create more jobs , and what 's happened here in Colorado under his leadership proves that .
And he has used his own experience as a small businessman who grew a business and was successful not to turn his back on what it took but to try to help more people get the tools they need to start those businesses , to grow those businesses .
And what a stark contrast with Donald Trump who has spent his career stiffing small businesses , refusing to pay his bills to small businesses .
And I got to tell you , I take that really personally .
My father was a small businessman , I mean really small nothing as successful as the governor 's enterprises he printed fabrics to turn them into draperies and it was hard work .
And I cannot imagine what it would have been like for my dad who stood at that long table and took a silk screen and put it down and then put paint into it , then took a squeegee and went across and then lifted it up and went down and went down over and over again and finally got the fabric printed , and then folded it up , and then loaded it into his car to take it to where it had been ordered from whether it was a restaurant , a hotel , any other business , an office building .
I cannot image what that would have felt like for my father , a Navy veteran , a chief petty officer during World War II to have done his part , to have fulfilled his contract and then be told we 're not going to pay you .
Now , when I first started hearing those stories about small businesses , I thought , well , maybe it happened once or twice .
But no , my friends , it happened over and over again .
Donald Trump would not pay people who did work , painters and plumbers and glass installers and marble installers and architects .
We now have a very long list . What kind of man does business by hurting other people ?
I am just so , so determined that we are not going to let him do to America what he has done to so many other people .
I want to also recognize your congressman , Congressman Ed Perlmutter .
Thank you , Ed , for being here . I want to thank your principal of this great high school , principal Thompson .
Thank you . And I want to thank a great man from Colorado , someone I had the distinct honor of serving with in the United States Senate and then serving with in the Obama Administration , and that is Ken Salazar .
I 'll tell you , you will not find a better person , someone who is always thinking about what he can do to help somebody else , and I for one am grateful for his friendship .
Now , when I think about our convention last week did any of you see it ?
Well , what we tried to do was to make clear that we 're not satisfied with where we are in the country , but we think we know how to make progress together .
We think we can put into effect a jobs program that will create millions of new jobs with rising incomes , and here 's what we 're going to do .
We 're going to have the biggest infrastructure investment program since World War II .
And if you look , our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our ports , our airports , our water systems , they 're all in need .
They all should be repaired . We have people who are driving long distances and spending hundreds and hundreds of dollars every year because of problems with the potholes or with the lack of maintenance .
We have people scared about the bridges in their counties .
They don't have much choice , but they shouldn't have to worry about whether they can get across or not .
So we 're going to make investments that will make America grow our economy , put people to work , and position us better to actually be competitive around the world .
But there 's a lot of infrastructure that you can't necessarily see that we want to work on .
We need a modern electric grid that can take clean , renewable energy and distribute it everywhere across America .
And here 's the other thing we need . We need to connect every community , no matter how isolated , how rural , how inner-city poor , no matter where it is , every community needs to be connected to broadband internet access .
This is a competitive issue . How are we going to help small businesses that don't have access ?
When I was in Pennsylvania a few days ago and I said that , I had a man tell me afterwards , he said ,
Well , you have no idea how bad it is in rural parts of Pennsylvania .
We still have dial up , and a lot of time that doesn't even work . '
And then I told folks that I 'd been talking to some teachers
you know I love teachers and I 'm going to support our teachers .
But here is what the teachers told me . They said there had recently been a national survey asking teachers about different things they do in the classroom and the like , and 70 percent of teachers said that they assign homework to their students that requires the students to go on the internet .
Now , I think that 's great because we want our kids to be ready for the jobs of the future and that means they 've got to understand how to learn and find information .
But here 's the rub : 5 million kids in America don't have access to internet in their homes .
So you know what ? We are leaving those kids behind while they 're still in elementary and secondary schools .
That is wrong . We 're going to make sure America , which invented the internet , is the most connected country in the world .
And here 's what else we 're going to do : I 'm going to support advanced manufacturing , manufacturing of all kinds .
Because I believe that we 've got a real opportunity to bring manufacturing back .
I visited a place called Johnstown Wire Technologies in Johnstown , Pennsylvania .
They started more than 100 years ago as a steel mill .
Now they 're making all kinds of wire products , and they 're starting to bring jobs back from China to do that work in America .
Now , when Donald Trump is asked about where he makes things , he makes them anywhere else but America .
His ties , his suits , his shirts , his furniture , his barware made all over the world .
Bangladesh , Turkey , Slovenia , Mexico . And when asked about that , he said , well , we don't make that stuff in America .
Well , I 'm here to tell you : Donald , you 're wrong .
And here 's how I know . I know he 's wrong because I 've been collecting information and visiting places that actually do make these things in America .
Just today I went to the Knotty Tie Company . And I met folks living right here in Denver who are making ties and scarves .
I hope you like this one because I got it at Knotty just a few hours ago .
I just got interviewed by one of the local newscasters , and first thing he said to me he didn't even know this was from Knotty he said , That 's a beautiful scarf . '
He said , That looks like it 's got Colorado colors . '
And in fact , one thing I really like about it , is printed right here on the scarf , it says made in Colorado , not China . '
So I got so into this that we now have a website went public today called hillaryclinton.com/makeithere .
And you can go on the website and you can see about 100 places around America where Donald could have made ties , shirts , suits , furniture , barware , right here in America .
And I hope that more people will start making things here in America again .
So we are going to work to grow the economy , and I look often at Denver and Colorado as examples .
And it 's another one of the reasons why I admire your governor the transit system in Denver combined with the new airport connecting not only Denver to the airport , but other places in the region , is growing this economy .
And very importantly , it 's attracting a lot of young people who want to be able to quickly move from work to home to entertainment and everything else .
So we see this happening in lots of places . And so when people say to me ,
Hey , we can't do that in America , ' I say ,
I don't know which America you 've been looking at . '
In fact , I couldn't figure out what country the Republican convention was talking about .
A negative , pessimistic view of America that is not who we are .
Do we have challenges ? Sure . But can we meet them ?
Absolutely . We are truly stronger together , and that 's what we 're going to be doing .
Now in addition to growing the economy , we 've got to make it fairer .
And I feel very strongly about this . We 've got to make this economy work for everybody , not just those at the top .
So we are going to make these investments . We are going to invest more in education , starting with preschool education .
We are going to train 50,000 teachers so that they can teach computer science in junior high and high school .
We are going to make college debt free so that everybody can afford to go .
And we 're going to make community college free so you can get the skills you need for the jobs of today and tomorrow .
And I want to say something really serious about this .
John and I have talked about this a lot . Look , I think it 's great ; everybody who wants to go to college should be able to afford to go to college .
Anybody with student debt we 're going to help you refinance the debt , because in America , if Donald Trump can plead bankruptcy six times and refinance his debts , American students and families ought to be able to refinance their debts .
But my friends , I do not believe that a four-year college education is the only path that we should have to a good job with a rising standard of living .
That 's why I want more technical education back in our high schools .
That 's why I want more apprenticeship programs in business and unions .
I get very excited about this , because there are more than a million jobs right now waiting to be filled , by machinists and tool and die makers , by people with real skills coders who can get a good job .
When I was at Johnstown Wire Technology , it 's a unionized plant .
U.S. Steelworkers represent that plant 's workers . And they get some people already trained , and then the union and management train others .
And the average salary is over $ 70,000 a year .
We are also going to raise the national minimum wage because no one who works full-time should still be living in poverty .
And I 'll tell you the fastest way we can raise incomes in America is to guarantee equal pay for women 's work .
And I am very I 'm encouraged . When I started talking about this more than a year ago , I could see kind of quizzical looks out in the audience .
And then I realized I 've got to explain this is not just a woman 's issue .
If you have a working mother , wife , daughter , or sister , it 's your issue .
You see , I get pretty excited about what we 're going to do .
I believe with all my heart that America 's best years are still ahead of us .
Now , that doesn't mean that I think it 's going to be easy .
But I know we 're up to the job . I just know we are .
I have no doubt about that . And we 're also up to the responsibility of leading the world toward peace and prosperity as well .
There is no doubt in my mind that Donald Trump is unqualified to be president and unfit to be commander-in-chief .
Anyone who spends his time insulting our military , demeaning the service of our POWs and our fallen soldiers , insulting Gold Star families , this is not someone who understands the honor , the duty of serving America .
I am so grateful to every single person who has ever put on the uniform of the United States military .
And it worries me , some of what I hear him say .
I mean , anyone who can be provoked by a tweet should not be anywhere near nuclear weapons .
And I want to I want to say a special word about something that 's important here in Colorado .
It 's important in the West . And that is we have a responsibility to protect our public lands in America .
The outdoor economy , the recreational economy is so important to so many places here in Colorado and elsewhere throughout the West .
And I couldn't believe that Trump has basically gone along with what they put into the Republican platform that would disrupt and take back public lands that are really held in trust for all of us .
So I want you to know as president , I will defend and protect America 's public lands and our conservation .
So we 're really having a good time in this campaign .
And we want everybody to join . I said in my speech on Thursday night I want to be the president for all Americans : Democrats , Republicans , and Independents .
I want to work for the struggling , the striving , and the successful .
I want more people to be lifted up to follow their own dreams .
So here 's what I hope you will do . I hope you will join our campaign .
And here in Colorado , if you text C-O to 47246 , you can get involved or go to our website at hillaryclinton.com .
And we are hiring organizers here in Colorado . We are also setting a goal of registering three million more American citizens to vote in November .
So make sure you 're registered . Look for your mail ballot in October .
And talk to your friends , your neighbors , your colleagues .
I believe that we are at a crossroads election . I 've laid out the best I could , the specific plans and ideas that I want to pursue as your president because I have this old-fashioned idea .
When you run for president , you ought to tell people what you want to do as their president .
And I have also told you because I want you to hold me accountable .
I will get up every single day and work hard for you and fight for you .
And I will fight to preserve our rights , whether they are civil rights or human rights or women 's rights or gay rights or voters ' rights or workers ' rights .
And I will take on the gun lobby for common sense gun safety reform .
One of the one of the things I said Thursday night , which I will repeat here because I want you to know this , I do not want to repeal the Second Amendment .
I do not want to take anyone 's gun away .
I just don't want you to get shot by somebody who shouldn't have a gun in the first place .
So we 've got great work to do , and I 'm excited about doing it with you because I do want you to know what I want to do as your president , to weigh that .
It 's like a big job interview . You 're hearing from two people that you might hire .
And I , frankly , think it 's better for us to have an economy where you hear
You 're hired , ' instead of You 're fired . '
So , Colorado , let 's get to work . Let 's win in November .
And let 's make sure we build an American future that we all could be part of .
Thank you , and God bless you . Thank you so much .
Hello Charlotte . It 's great to be back in North Carolina with so many friends :
With Congresswoman Alma Adams , and Congressman David Price , and Congressman G.K. Butterfield .
And your next U.S. Senator , Deborah Ross . And your next Governor , Roy Cooper .
And of course , with our president , Barack Obama .
I feel very privileged because I 've known the President in many roles .
As a colleague in the Senate . As an opponent in a hard-fought primary .
And as the President I was so proud to serve as Secretary of State .
But I 've also known him as the friend that I was honored to stand with in good times and hard times .
Someone who has never forgotten where he came from . And Donald , if you 're out there tweeting , it 's Hawaii .
Over the years , we 've had some memorable experiences together like storming a secret meeting of foreign leaders at a global climate summit .
That was fun . You should have seen the Chinese guards try to stop us .
Now , they put their arms out and the President just went right through .
Then they put their arms out , and I went right under .
And the President , with that amazing smile of his , said ,
Hey , we 've been looking for you . Now through it all , as we went from rivals to partners to friends , my esteem for him just kept growing .
So did my admiration for his brilliant wife , Michelle , and those two amazing daughters that they have raised .
My husband and I know how hard it is to raise a child in the public eye , in the fishbowl of the White House .
But the Obamas have done a fabulous job . Malia
who just graduated from high school and celebrated her 18th birthday yesterday
and Sasha who has the energy and enthusiasm of a wonderful young woman .
Now I happen to think those two young woman might be the most impressive accomplishment of all for our President .
Now it means so much to have the President 's support in this campaign .
After all , he knows a thing or two about winning elections take it from me .
And he also knows that despite all the progress we 've made under his leadership , and yes we have , we still have a lot of work to do .
President Obama 's job , one that he did not ask for but was handed to him , was to save us from a second Great Depression and that is exactly what he did .
Actually , I don't think he gets the credit he deserves for saving our economy .
We 've added 14 million private-sector jobs . The auto industry just had its best year ever .
20 million people now have health care . Clean energy production has soared .
I could go on and on , but you get the idea .
That 's what leadership looks like . Our next president has a different job to do
building on the progress that President Obama has made . We have to continue to take on deep structural challenges that existed long before the crisis .
We can see it here in North Carolina and across the country : inequality is too high , wages are too low , and it 's just too hard to get ahead .
We need an economy that works for everyone , not just those at the top .
So we 're setting five big , ambitious goals . First , under President Obama and Vice President Biden , we 've had 75 straight months of job growth .
I want us to see 75 more . So in my first 100 days as President , we 'll make the biggest investment in new , good-paying jobs since World War II .
And when I say good-paying jobs , I mean exactly that .
Donald Trump thinks wages are too high . He actually stood on the debate stage and said that .
He wants to get rid of the federal minimum wage altogether .
Well , I think anyone who is willing to work hard should be able to find a job that pays well enough to raise a family .
So we 're going to increase the federal minimum wage , and give the middle class a raise .
That 's good for our families , good for our economy , and boy is it good for our country .
Second , we 're going to make college debt-free for all .
And we 're going to build on the President 's idea to make community college free .
And we 're going to help millions of people struggling with existing student debt save thousands of dollars .
Third , we 're going to rewrite the rules , and crack down on companies that ship jobs overseas and profits to go with them .
Let 's reward the companies that share profits with their employees instead .
And we 're going to defend and strengthen the tough reforms President Obama put in place on the financial industry not tear them up like Donald Trump says he 'll do .
We need to make sure that Wall Street can never wreck Main Street ever again .
Fourth , we 're going to make sure that Wall Street , corporations , and the super-rich pay their fair share of taxes .
It is just plain wrong that a millionaire can pay a lower tax rate than their secretaries , and we 're going to stop it .
And oh , by the way , we 're going to keep asking to see Donald Trump 's tax returns .
And finally , we 're going to step up and respond to the way American families actually live and work in the 21st century .
Our families , our workplaces have changed , so isn't it time for our policies to change ?
Donald Trump can accuse me of playing the woman card all he wants , but if fighting for equal pay and affordable childcare and paid family leave is playing the woman card , then deal me in .
Most of all , most of all most of all though , we 're going to build on the vision for America that President Obama has always championed a vision for a future where we do great things together , not as red states and blue states but as the United States .
When I look at President Obama , I see a leader with heart , depth , and humility .
Someone who , in spite of the obstruction he 's faced , still reaches for common ground and common purpose .
Some of you might remember , that he and I competed against each other as hard as we could back in 2008 .
But when it was over , I was proud to endorse him and campaign for him .
And I 'll never forget when he called me the Sunday after the election , asking me to come to Chicago .
It turned out he wanted me to be Secretary of State , and I don't think anybody saw that coming especially me .
And as I travelled on behalf of our country , a lot of people around the world asked how President Obama and I could work so well together after being such fierce competitors .
In some places , the person who loses an election gets exiled or executed , not asked to be Secretary of State .
But President Obama asked me to serve , and I accepted .
You know why ? We both love our country . That is how democracy is supposed to work .
We just celebrated 240 years of independence . In America , we put common interest before self-interest .
We stand together because we know we 're stronger together .
That 's the kind of president Barack Obama has been .
He 's made difficult , even unpopular decisions for the good of our country .
I have sat with him in the Situation Room and seen him make the hardest choices a president faces .
He does it with steady , principled leadership . He 's a statesman , leading not just our country but the entire world .
It was his vision , it was his vision and diplomacy that secured a historic global agreement on climate change , put a lid on Iran 's nuclear program , opened up Cuba , and rallied the world to curb the spread of nuclear weapons .
I saw him go toe-to-toe with the toughest foreign leaders , and to give the order to go after Osama bin Laden .
This , my friends , is a president who knows how to keep us safe and strong .
Compare that to Donald Trump . Can you imagine him sitting in the Oval Office the next time America faces a crisis ?
The world hangs on every word our President says , and Donald Trump is simply unqualified and temperamentally unfit to be our President and Commander-in-Chief .
So here in North Carolina this election is our chance to say ,
Our country is better than this . In America , we don't tear each other down , we lift each other up .
We build bridges , not walls . We don't call the country we love a disaster or a laughing stock we know America already is the greatest country on earth .
Just think about those early patriots who met in Philadelphia that hot summer of 1776 .
They knew we would all rise or fall together . Nobody who looked like Barack Obama or me would have been included back then .
But we 're here today because the story of America is the story of hard-fought , hard-won progress .
So , I want you to remember that for 240 years , our history has moved in that direction slowly at times , but unmistakably .
As the President has reminded us , the arc of the moral universe is long but it bends toward justice .
So if you believe , along with me and the President , that our best days as a nation are still ahead of us , please , join us in this campaign .
Take out your phone right now . Take out your phone and text JOIN to 47246 .
Or go to hillaryclinton.com . We are hiring organizers right here in North Carolina .
We 're going to fight for every vote in this state , and with your help , we 're going to win it .
So , I don't know about you but we are fired up and ready to go .
Ready to win this election . Please join me in welcoming the President of the United States , Barack Obama .
Hillary Clinton delivered the following remarks at the African Methodist Episcopal Church National Convention in Philadelphia , PA
Giving all praise and honor to God . Thank you for that welcome , and for letting me be a part of this anniversary celebration for the AME Church .
I want to thank Bishop Green as well as Bishop Bryant , Bishop White , Bishop Ingram , Bishop Young , Bishop McKenzie , Bishop Jackson , Dr. Richard Allen Lewis , Sr.
, Reverend Dr. Jeffery B . Cooper , Sr. , Bishop Snorton , Reverend Vincent and the AME General Conference Choir , which I had the great pleasure of hearing from backstage .
There is no better place to mark this milestone for the AME Church than right here in Philadelphia , the city where this church was founded by a former slave 200 years ago .
Today , we join to celebrate your esteemed history , the leaders and congregants who built this community and kept it strong , and your legacy of service .
You seek to meet what the Book of Micah tells us are the Lord 's requirements for each of us :
To do justice , love kindness , and to walk humbly with your God .
As President Obama has said , the church is the beating heart of the African American community .
This is the place where people worship , study , grieve and rejoice without fear of persecution or mistreatment .
That is a precious thing , my friends , in this world .
I know that , from my experience as a lifelong Methodist , how important my own church community has been to me .
So I come here today , first and foremost , to say thank you .
Thank you for being part of this historic institution , and for carrying its work forward , as Bishop Green said .
I also come tonight as a mother , and a grandmother to two beautiful little children .
And like so many parents and grandparents across America , I have been following the news of the past few days with horror and grief .
On Tuesday , Alton Sterling , father of five , was killed in Baton Rouge approached by the police for selling CDs outside a convenience store .
On Wednesday , Philando Castile , 32 years old , was killed outside St. Paul pulled over by the police for a broken tail light .
And last night in Dallas , during a peaceful protest related to those killings , there was a vicious , appalling attack .
A sniper targeted police officers . He said he wanted to hurt white people .
Twelve officers were shot , along with two civilians . Five five officers have died .
We now know all their names : Brent Thompson , Michael Krol , Michael Smith , Lorne Ahrens , and Patrick Zamarripa .
And as I was on my way here today , we heard reports of another shooting yesterday morning in Tennessee .
What can one say about events like these ? What can people and leaders of faith say about events like these ?
It 's hard , isn't it , even to know where to start .
But let 's start here let 's take a moment to pray for all the families and the loved ones suffering today .
For Alton 's grieving children . For the four-year-old girl who bravely comforted her mother while Philando died in front of them .
For the families of those police officers who lived every day with the fear that something like this could happen , and will always be proud of their service and sacrifice .
We pray for those families , and for the souls of everyone we lost this week and in all weeks preceding .
May they rest in God 's peace . Now , there are many unanswered questions about each of these incidents .
We will learn more in the days ahead . And when we know as much as we can , there must be a just accounting .
For now , let 's focus on what we already know deep in our hearts .
We know there is something wrong with our country . There is too much violence , too much hate , too much senseless killing , too many people dead who shouldn't be .
And we know there is clear evidence that African Americans are much more likely to be killed in police incidents than any other group of Americans .
And we know there is too little trust in too many places between police and the communities they are sworn to protect .
With so little common ground , it can feel impossible to have the conversations we need to have , to begin fixing what 's broken .
We owe our children better than this . We owe ourselves better than this .
No one has all the answers . We need to find them together .
Indeed , that is the only way we can find them .
Those are the truest things I can offer today . We must do better , together .
Let 's begin with something simple but vital : listening to each other .
For Scripture tells us to incline our ears to wisdom and apply our hearts to understanding .
The deaths of Alton and Philando are the latest in a long and painful litany of African Americans killed in police incidents 123 so far this year alone .
We know the names of other victims , too : Tamir Rice .
Sandra Bland . Walter Scott . Dontre Hamilton . Laquan McDonald .
Eric Garner . Michael Brown . Freddie Gray . Brandon Tate-Brown , whose mother Tanya is here today , and who was killed not far from here a year and a half ago .
Tragically , we could go on and on , couldn't we .
The families of the lost are trying to tell us .
We need to listen . People are crying out for criminal justice reform .
Families are being torn apart by excessive incarceration . Young people are being threatened and humiliated by racial profiling .
Children are growing up in homes shattered by prison and poverty .
They 're trying to tell us . We need to listen .
Brave police officers are working hard every day to inspire trust and confidence .
As we mourn the Dallas police officers who died and pray for those wounded , let 's not forget how the Dallas Police Department in particular has earned a reputation for excellence .
They 've worked hard for years to improve policing and strengthen their bonds with the community .
And they 've gotten results . Police officers across the country are pouring their hearts into this work , because they know how vital it is to the peace , tranquility , justice , and equality of America .
They 're trying to tell us . And we need to listen .
People are crying out for relief from gun violence . We remember Reverend Clementa Pinckney , eight congregants at Mother Emanuel in Charleston and thousands more killed every year by guns across our nation .
Things have become so broken in Washington that to just try to get a vote on compromise gun safety reforms , John Lewis himself had to stage a sit-in on the floor of the House of Representatives .
Gun violence is ripping apart people 's lives . They 're trying to tell us .
And we need to listen . I know that , just by saying all these things together , I may upset some people .
I 'm talking about criminal justice reform the day after a horrific attack on police officers .
I 'm talking about courageous , honorable police officers just a few days after officer-involved killings in Louisiana and Minnesota .
I 'm bringing up guns in a country where merely talking about comprehensive background checks and getting assault weapons off our streets gets you demonized .
But all these things can be true at once . We do need police and criminal justice reforms , to save lives and make sure all Americans are treated equally in rights and dignity .
We do need to support police departments and stand up for the men and women who put their lives on the line every day to protect us .
And we do need to reduce gun violence . We may disagree about how to do all these things , but surely we can all agree with those basic premises .
Surely this week showed us how true they are . Now , I have set forth plans for over a year to reduce excessive violence , reform our sentencing laws , support police departments that are doing things right , make it harder for the wrong people to get their hands on guns .
For example , there are two important steps that I will take as president .
First , I will bring law enforcement and communities together to develop national guidelines on the use of force by police officers .
We will make it clear for everyone to see when deadly force is warranted , and when it isn't .
And we will emphasize proven methods for de-escalating situations before they reach that point .
And second , let 's be honest let 's acknowledge that implicit bias still exists across our society and even in the best police departments .
We have to tackle it together , which is why in my first budget , I will commit $1 billion to find and fund the best training programs , support new research , and make this a national policing priority .
Let 's learn from those police departments like Dallas that have been making progress , apply their lessons nationwide .
Now , plans like these are important . But we have to acknowledge that on their own they won't be enough .
On their own , our thoughts and prayers aren't enough , either .
We need to do some hard work inside ourselves , too .
Today , there are people all across America sick over what happened in Dallas , and fearful that the murders of these police officers will mean that vital questions raised by Alton 's and Philando 's deaths will go unanswered .
That is a reasonable fear . Today , there are people all across America who watched what happened in Dallas last night and are thinking , no frustration with the police could ever justify this bloodshed .
How did we get here ? And is there more to come ?
That 's a reasonable fear , too . It is up to all of us to make sure those fears don't come true .
We cannot , we must not vilify police officers . Remember what those officers were doing when they died .
They were protecting a peaceful march . They were people in authority , making sure their fellow citizens had the right to protest authority .
And there is nothing more vital to our democracy than that .
And they died for it . Ending the systemic racism that plagues our country and rebuilding our communities where the police and citizens all see themselves as being on the same side will require contributions from all of us .
White Americans need to do a better job of listening when African Americans talk talk about the seen and unseen barriers you face every day .
We need to try , as best we can , to walk in one another 's shoes to imagine what it would be like if people followed us around stores , or locked their car doors when we walked past .
Or if every time our children went to play in the park , or went for a ride , or just to the store to buy iced tea and Skittles , we said a prayer Please , God please , God don't let anything happen to my baby .
And let 's put ourselves in the shoes of police officers , kissing their kids and spouses goodbye every day and heading off to a dangerous job we need them to do .
When gunfire broke out yesterday night , and everyone ran to safety , the police officers ran the other way into the gunfire .
That 's the kind of courage our police and first responders show every single day somewhere across America .
And let 's remember let 's think about what Dallas Police Chief David Brown said this morning .
He said , Please join me in applauding these brave men and women , who do this job under great scrutiny , under great vulnerability , who literally risk their lives to protect our democracy .
He went on to say , We don't feel much support most days .
Let 's not make today most days . Let 's remember that not just today but every day .
Let 's ask ourselves , what can I do ? What can I personally do to stop violence and promote justice ?
How can I show that your life matters to me ?
That I have a stake in your safety and wellbeing ?
Elie Wiesel , who died last week , once clarified for us that the opposite of love is not hate it 's indifference .
And the opposite of life is not death it 's indifference .
None of us can afford to be indifferent toward each other not now , not ever .
And I 'm going to keep talking about these issues with every audience .
And if I 'm elected , I 'll start working on this on day one and keep at it every single day after that .
I want you to know the 24-hour news cycle moves on I won't .
This is so important to who we are , what kind of nation we are making for our children and our grandchildren .
As President Obama said yesterday , and as we all know in our hearts to be true : We are better than this .
And if we push hard enough , and long enough , we can bend the arc of history toward justice .
We can avoid that choice that Dr. King posed for us between chaos and community .
So yes , this is about our country . It 's also about our kids .
There 's nothing more important than that . And I think it 's about our faith .
We have a lot of work to do . We don't have a moment to lose .
But I would not be here tonight if I did not believe we can come together with a sense of shared purpose and belief in our shared humanity , and if I did not know we must , because truly we are stronger together .
Not separated into factions or sides ; not shouting over each other about who matters more or who has more cause to be upset ; but together , facing these challenges together .
And if we do this right and have the hard conversations we need to have , we will become even stronger like steel tempered by fire .
Fierce debates are part of who we are just like freedom and order , justice and security complementary values of American life .
They are not easy . They challenge us to dig deep , and constantly seek the right balance .
But in the end , if we do that work , we will become a better nation .
If we stand with each other now , we can build a future where no one is left out or left behind , and everyone can share in the promise of America which is big enough for everyone , not to be reserved for a few .
But we know something we know that work is hard , don't we ?
I 'm calling on this historic church , and all of our churches , to think hard about what special role you can play .
Every day , you teach and show us about the Golden Rule and so much else .
Why can't we really believe in and act on it ?
To treat others as we would want to be treated .
In the 13th chapter of First Corinthians , St. Paul extols the virtues of faith , hope , and love for our fellow human beings .
He says we need them all in this life , because of our imperfections : we see through a glass darkly and only know in part .
He proclaims love the greatest virtue , necessary to keep faith and hope alive and to give us direction .
I 've tried to say for some time now that our country needs more love and kindness .
I know it 's not the kind of thing presidential candidates usually say .
But we have to find ways to repair these wounds and close these divides .
The great genius and salvation of the United States is our capacity to do and to be better .
And we must answer the call to do that again .
It 's critical to everything else we want to achieve more jobs with rising income ; good education no matter what ZIP code a child lives in ; affordable college ; paying back debts ; health care for everyone .
We must never give up on the dream of this nation .
I want to close with a favorite passage a passage that you all know that means a great deal to me and I 'm sure to many of you , from Galatians .
Let us not grow weary in doing good for in due season , we shall reap , if we do not lose heart .
My friends , let us not grow weary . Let us plan the path forward for all of God 's children .
There are lost lives to redeem , bright futures to claim .
Let us go forth go forward , Bishop with a sense of heartfelt love and commitment .
And may the memory of those we 've lost light our way toward the future our children and grandchildren deserve .
Thank you , AME , and God bless you . Thank you all , it 's wonderful to be here with you .
I want to thank Pauleen and Alex , and I was delighted to hear from backstage former administrator Alvarez of the Small Business Administration .
And I was cheering along with you as you heard from Secretary of Labor Tom Perez .
He did an excellent job in sounding the call to action on behalf of enforcing labor laws that will give middle class and working class people a fair return on their labor .
And it is a great treat to be once again with so many of you .
I was looking at the list of attendees , and I was delighted to see so many familiar names but also so many new names of people who are now elected and appointed officials across our country from local government to state government to the Federal level .
And I honor each and every one of you for your service on behalf of your constituents , your community , and America .
Before I begin , I want to say a few words about the tragedy in Charleston , South Carolina .
I was in Charleston yesterday . I went to a technical school Trident Tech where
I met with young people who are serving apprenticeships . It was such a positive , upbeat , optimistic event .
So many of those young people were for the first time seeing what they could do and being paid for doing it .
The administration and faculty of the school was so proud .
The businesses that were employing the diverse group of apprentices were getting their money 's worth .
And I left feeling not only great about Charleston , but great about America .
When I got to Las Vegas , I learned about the horrific massacre in the church .
You know the shock and pain of this crime of hate strikes deep .
Nine people women and men cut down at prayer .
Murdered in a house of God . It just broke my heart .
That of course is the last place we should ever see violence .
We shouldn't see it anywhere . In the days ahead we will once again ask what led to this terrible tragedy and where we as a nation need to go .
In order to make sense of it , we have to be honest .
We have to face hard truths about race , violence , guns , and division .
Today we join our hearts with the people of Charleston and South Carolina people everywhere who pray for the victims , who pray for the families , who pray for a community that knows too much sorrow .
And we pray for justice that the people of Charleston find peace and that our country finds unity .
The church where these killings took place is known as Mother Emanuel .
And like any mother , it holds its flock close .
Today is a day to hold each other even closer .
More than fifty years ago , Dr. Martin Luther King , Jr. told the families of the girls killed in the bombing of the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham , Alabama ,
You do not walk alone . Today we say to the families of Mother Emanuel and to all the people of Charleston , You do not walk alone .
You do not walk alone because millions of Americans regardless of race or creed or ethnicity or religion are walking with you .
In grief . In solidarity . In determination . We are with you .
And we stand with you as we seek answers and take action .
How many innocent people in our country from little children , to church members , to movie theater attendees how many people do we need to see cut down before we act ?
So as we mourn , as our hearts break a little more , and as we send this message of solidarity , we will not forsake those who have been victimized by gun violence .
This time we have to find answers together . I pledge to you I will work with you those of you who are local officials , those of you who are thinking hard about your own let 's unite in partnership , not just to talk , but to act .
Just as we turn sorrow into service , we need to recognize the many contributions that NALEO and all of you are making to our communities and our country .
There is so much that is positive happening in America today .
This full ballroom speaks volumes to that . Promoting the full participation of Latinos in our politics and our government and our economy is good for our democracy ; it 's good for America .
So I thank you . I know how hard it is sometimes to get out there , to put yourself on the line to run for office , to accept a difficult , difficult appointment that will really stretch you , maybe even in the midst of controversy .
So thank you , thank you for being willing to be a servant leader .
I also want to thank everyone who helped put this event together , especially those behind the scenes who never get the credit they deserve .
Earlier , I was able to visit with some of the people who keep this hotel and this city working day and night .
Las Vegas wouldn't exist without the cooks and dishwashers who stand on their feet all day .
Think of the housekeepers and food servers , and the porters and the dealers .
Make no mistake : this is a city that runs on hard work on grit as well as glitz .
And it 's that same determination , and a lot of hard work and sacrifice , that brought America back from the Great Recession .
Across our country , Americans made new beginnings . You worked extra shifts , you took second jobs , you postponed home repairs , families figured out how to make it work .
When I was in Las Vegas in 2007 , I was going door to door in neighborhoods that were right on the brink of massive foreclosures .
I was just talking to some of the elected representatives from those neighborhoods earlier
and they were telling me how slowly people were pulling themselves back .
So we 're standing again , but we 're not yet running the way America should .
This past Saturday at the Four Freedoms Park in New York City , a tribute to Franklin Roosevelt 's presidency and his Four Freedoms speech , I laid out Four Fights we must wage and win together to make our economy and our country work for every American .
First , build an economy for tomorrow not yesterday Second , strengthen America 's families , the foundation of everything we are
Third , harness all of our power , our smarts , and our values to lead the world
And fourth , revitalize our democracy back here at home .
For me , this all goes back to the basic bargain of America .
If you do your part , you ought to be able to get ahead .
And when everybody does his or her part , America gets ahead too .
I believe that success is measured by how many children climb out of poverty , not by how much the wealthiest Americans have at the end of the year .
I believe success is measured by how many start-ups and small businesses open and thrive , not how big and fat the paychecks of CEOs are , I believe success is measured by how many young people go to college without drowning in debt .
How many people find a good job with good benefits
How many families stay strong and thrive . I believe that in the greatest democracy on Earth , we should be making it easier for people to vote , not putting up new barriers that disempower and disenfranchise .
And who are those barriers aimed at ? You know who they 're aimed at , young people , poor people , people of color , even the elderly .
That 's why I 've called for more early voting and for universal , automatic registration when a youngster turns 18 .
I believe in America 's diversity , our openness , our devotion to human rights and freedom .
These are the qualities that prepare us for the demands of a world that is more interconnected than ever .
Now , I didn't learn these values in politics . I learned them from my own family .
My mother taught me that everybody needs a chance and a champion .
She knew what it was like not to have either one .
Her own parents abandoned her , and by 14 she was out on her own , working as a housemaid .
Years later , when I was old enough to understand , I asked what kept her going .
Her answer was simple : Kindness from someone who believed she mattered .
The first grade teacher who saw she had nothing to eat at lunch and , without embarrassing her , brought extra food to share .
The woman whose house she cleaned , letting her go to high school so long as all of her chores were done .
Because those people believed in her , she believed in me .
And she taught me to believe in the God-given potential of every person , of every American .
That 's what animates the fights I 'm taking on and the agenda I 'm proposing .
As part of our first fight to build the economy for tomorrow this past Monday , in New Hampshire , I announced plans to make preschool and quality childcare available to every child in America .
I think all our kids need the opportunity to get off to the best possible start .
But too many of our children are starting off behind , especially in families where economic pressures on parents translate into less time for kids less time reading , talking , and singing .
And you know what , when children hear fewer words , they learn fewer words .
And they begin school with smaller vocabularies and then they struggle ever to catch up .
As you know , more than one-quarter of all American kids under 5 years old are Latino .
And they are disproportionately affected by this word gap .
They are also less likely to have access to formal childcare or preschool education .
And some parents have actually been told that they shouldn't speak to their babies in their native language .
But that is just not correct . The research is clear that whether it 's Spanish or English or Russian or Chinese , more talking to your babies is always better and helps to build their brains .
That 's why at the Clinton Foundation , I started an initiative called
Too Small to Fail , to help support parents to become their babies ' first teachers .
And we joined with Univision to specifically reach Hispanic families .
And to get that message out you know , 80% of your brain is formed by the age of 3 .
So the more you talk in Spanish the more those neurons and synapses start to fire .
And the more likely that your child will be prepared to be bilingual , which I really envy , since I 'm barely monolingual .
And everywhere I go , when I meet children who are bilingual , I tell them
Oh you are so smart , because they are .
And their parents and their families and their teachers have helped them to be bilingual .
So let 's get the word out to everyone you can reach in your communities : Read , talk , and sing , from the very earliest days .
And sometimes even when doing chores , part of our Too Small to Fail initiative is to put signs on bus stops and inside the buses and in doctors ' offices , and everywhere children and families gather with this message .
And of course , with our new , amazing , brilliant , beautiful , eight-month-old granddaughter , we are talking , reading , and singing so much that I am convinced that her first words will be :
enough , with the reading and talking and singing .
But when she gets to kindergarten , she will have heard 30 million more words than a child from a less advantaged background .
I want to close that gap , and then do everything we can to recognize that there 's so much talent among our youngest Americans , that we 've got to do more to build those ladders of opportunity .
And that 's why in my campaign I 'm making early learning and child care top priorities , aiming for every four-year-old in America to be able to access high quality preschool in the next ten years , everywhere , every community we represent , every state of our country .
I want to double our investment in Early Head Start , a program I helped to create as First Lady .
And help middle class families deal with rising childcare costs .
Now , I know that there will be some who wonder :
Now if she 's running for president , why is she talking about babies and toddlers , and early childhood ?
She should talk about the really important issues . Well it 's not just because I 'm a mom and a grandmother , it 's because I know that if we 're going to prepare our children for the jobs of tomorrow , we need to take seriously the task of giving those littlest kids every opportunity to succeed .
So yes , do I love little kids ? You bet I do .
Always have . But do I love this country and want it to be successful , so we that have people ready to do the jobs that will make us so ?
Absolutely . So yes , I 'm going to talk about early childhood education and preschool all through this campaign .
And I 'm going to do my best to make sure all our kids have the opportunity to succeed at every step of their development .
That means staffing our primary and secondary schools with k-12 teachers who are second to none in the world , and get the respect they deserve for sparking the love of learning in every child .
It means making college affordable and available to all and lifting the crushing burden of student debt .
I support President Obama 's plan for two years of free community college , and I will be rolling out my specific agenda in the weeks ahead .
And yesterday , in South Carolina , I called for a new $1500 tax credit that creates incentives for more businesses to invest in apprenticeships , with special bonuses for providing opportunities to young people , too many of whom are still out of work and out of school .
We have nearly 6 million young people in America between 16 and 24 who are neither in work nor in school .
I think we can reverse that . But we 've got to get back to teaching kids the skills for jobs that are going to be available in the future , and I will do everything I can to better prepare young people .
That means bringing back technical and vocational education not only in manufacturing , but in computer programming .
As president , I 'll fight for young people working to break into the workforce .
I 'll fight for older workers seeking a promotion or transition into to new careers .
For moms who are reentering the workforce , for veterans who deserve the best chance possible to get the job they can support a family with , everyone eager to learn and to work .
I 'll embrace public-private partnerships that link high schools to community colleges and job training programs with employers , so there 's a real pipeline of opportunity .
From cradle to college , and beyond we have to make sure our kids and our families have the tools and support they need to succeed .
And I was thrilled to hear Secretary Perez talking about all of the apprenticeship and job training programs that he is championing at the Department of Labor .
Now , strengthening families is the second fight . Parents today face so many pressures : they 're squeezing every minute out of a 24-hour day , many are balancing unpredictable work schedules , not knowing when their next shift will be .
A lot of families are scattered across our country , or even across continents , so it 's harder for relatives to pitch in .
Too many families have been ripped apart by prison or deportation or violence .
Families are the backbone of America . When families are strong , America is strong .
I 'll fight for more parents to have the right to earn paid sick days and paid family leave , no one should have to choose between keeping a paycheck and caring for a new baby or a sick relative .
And you should be able to look forward to retirement with confidence , not anxiety , and have the peace of mind that your healthcare will be there when you need it without breaking the bank .
And if we really want to strengthen families , then we have to finally , once and for all , fix our broken immigration system .
Now , this is an economic issue , of course , but it 's a family issue too .
I will fight for comprehensive immigration reform with a real path to citizenship for families .
I will stand up against any attempt to expose DREAMers to deportation .
And , as I said as I said recently here in Las Vegas , if Congress continues to refuse to act , as President I would do everything possible under the law to go even further that what President Obama has attempted to do .
I wish every one of you could have been with me at the high school here in Las Vegas , to have heard from those DREAMers .
It would have made you so proud . You would have recognized people you know .
I was lucky , over the course of my life , to know people who may not have been called DREAMers at the time , because the term had not been adopted , but who were the children of farmworkers who made so much of their lives and contributed so much to our country .
To the immigrants who came here , maybe without papers , but with a burning desire and ambition to make the most out of their own God-given potential .
I know these people ; you know them . There are so many people with deep ties and contributions to our communities , like many parents of DREAMers , who deserve a chance to stay , and I will fight for them too .
But I don't have to wait to become President to take a stand , right here , and right now , against divisive rhetoric that demonizes immigrants and their families .
It 's wrong , and no one should stand for it .
We are blessed to live in a tolerant and generous nation , we should celebrate those values and model them in our own lives , and in our politics .
This ultimately is about how we treat each other . What kind of country and world we want to live in .
It 's about the habits of our heart , which lie at the real foundation of who we are as a nation .
When I hear words of hatred and anger directed at any of our fellow human beings , I ask myself :
What is motivating that ? Did the people who feel so much hatred and anger never look in the mirror and realize that they , too , are fellow human beings ?
Did they not learn the same lessons I did in Sunday school ?
Did they not sing the same hymns about how we are all one ?
We should work together to build an America where every family feels like they belong .
An inclusive society , what I once called a village , that has a place for everyone .
Now this is not new wisdom , but it 's so fiercely urgent today .
I 'll never forget hearing Dr. King speak in Chicago , many years ago .
I was taken there with my church youth group . I was just a girl , but the youth minister took some of us into the city to hear this man that we 'd begun to read about , to hear his words with our own ears .
Dr. King 's sermon that night was titled , Remaining Awake through a Revolution , and he challenged us to stay engaged in the cause of justice , not to slumber while the world changed around us .
Well , the world is still changing , and it 's up to us to shape that change , to build the future we want .
I 've spent my life fighting for children , families , and our country , and I 'm not stopping now .
Like so much else in my life , I got this from my mother , too .
When I was a girl , she never let me back down from any bully or barrier .
In her later years , she lived with us , and she was still teaching me the same lessons .
I 'd come home from a long day in the Senate or the State Department , I 'd sit down with her at the small table in our breakfast nook , and just let everything pour out .
And she would remind me why we keep fighting , even when the odds are long and the opposition is fierce .
I can still hear her saying , Life 's not about what happens to you ; it 's about what you do with what happens to you .
So get back out there , she would say .
That 's pretty good advice for all of us , I think .
We all have a part to play in America 's story , and our families , our businesses , unions , houses of worship and schools .
I 'm looking forward to a great debate from Democrats , Republicans , and Independents .
I 'm not running to be a president only for those Americans who already agree with me ; I want to be a president for all Americans .
So I hope you will join with me , to build an America again based on that basic bargain , where if you do your part , you can get ahead and stay ahead .
An America where we don't leave anyone out or anyone behind .
An America where a DREAMer can see dreams come true .
An America where a father can tell his daughter , You can be anything you want to be , even the President of the United States .
Thank you all very much ! Thank you so very much , thank you .
Thanks for the great tour , which I really appreciated having the chance to look around this impressive building and learning about everything that is being done here .
The DART Central Station , a LEED Platinum certified that 's the highest rating available , and so everyone who contributed to that , I really applaud .
As Elizabeth was saying , the numbers are impressive : A quarter of the construction materials were recycled .
More than a million gallons of rainwater have been cleaned and reused , leading to big savings in water consumption .
Rooftop solar panels have reduced carbon emissions and saved money .
Seventy eight geothermal wells were dug and are now producing the energy for heating and cooling .
There is just so much to admire in this building and what it stands for , and it 's the kind of innovation and progress we want to see all over America .
It 's good for our economy , good for the health of our families and communities , and yes , good for our planet .
Now , I know there are still people who would rather not hear this .
Some deny climate change exists at all . Others throw up their hands and say ,
Sorry , I 'm not a scientist . Well , I 'm not a scientist either .
That 's why I think it 's important to listen to scientists .
It 's important to heed the warnings based on extensive scientific research to see what 's going on here in our own country and certainly around the world .
The reality of climate change is unforgiving no matter what the deniers say .
Sea levels are rising . Ice caps are melting . Storms , wildfires , and extreme weather are wreaking havoc .
This is one of the most urgent threats of our time , and we have no choice but to rise and meet it .
Now , just as this challenge is enormous , so are the opportunities it presents .
Here in Iowa , you 've already moved past the old , false choices between protecting our environment and growing the economy .
Instead you are thriving by doing both . Iowa is leading the nation in wind energy .
This year , for the first time , Iowa is producing roughly a third of your total electricity from renewables .
And as I like to say as I travel around the country , if Iowa can do it , so can the rest of the country !
Look to Iowa to see how this can work . With leadership from President Obama , and the ingenuity of entrepreneurs and innovators across our country , we are on our way to a clean energy future .
We 're showing the world there is no challenge too great for America to tackle .
But we have to do even more . And we need to do it now .
So on day one as president , I will set two ambitious national goals for renewable energy .
First , we need to have more than half a billion solar panels installed across the country by the end of my first term .
Second , we 'll set a 10-year goal of generating enough renewable energy to power every single home in America .
Not some homes . Not most homes . Every home in America .
Now , I know these goals will test our capacities , but I know they are within our reach .
And we 're all going to have to do our part .
But that 's who we are as Americans . We don't hide from change ; we harness it .
And over the next few months , I will lay out a comprehensive agenda for meeting these national goals and going even further to address the broader climate challenge .
We will make America the world 's clean energy superpower .
We will develop and deploy the clean energy technologies of the future .
Transform our grid to give Americans more control over the energy they produce and consume .
And yes , I will defend President Obama 's Clean Power Plant Clean Power Plan against attacks from Republicans and their corporate backers .
We 'll launch a Clean Energy Challenge that supports and partners with states , cities , and rural communities that are ready to lead on clean energy .
We 'll stop the giveaways to big oil companies and extend , instead , tax incentives for clean energy , while making them more cost-effective for both taxpayers and producers .
We 'll support and improve the Renewable Fuel Standard that has been such a success for Iowa and much of rural America .
And even as we face the threat of climate change head on , we cannot close our eyes to the challenges facing hard-working families in Coal Country , who kept our lights on and our factories running for more than a century .
We should guarantee that coal miners and their families get the benefits they 've earned and the respect they deserve .
We also have to mobilize an unprecedented global commitment to reduce carbon emissions around the world .
And I know firsthand from my time as Secretary of State that America 's ability to lead the world on this issue hinges on our commitment to act ourselves .
No country will fall in line just because we tell them to .
They need to see us taking significant steps of our own .
The decisions we make in the next decade can make all of this possible or they can keep us trapped in the past .
I refuse to turn my back on what is one of the greatest threats and greatest opportunities America faces .
I refuse to let those who are deniers , who disagree with what we need to do , to rip away all the progress we 've made and leave our country exposed to the most severe consequences of climate change .
America needs to lead this fight , not go MIA .
That 's why I 'm announcing these goals today . It 's why over the course of this campaign , I 'm going to keep this challenge front and center .
And it 's why , as president , I 'll do everything I can to lead us toward that clean energy future and to work with partners in the state and local level who are doing exactly what we see here in this station and what is being done across Iowa .
That 's the kind of positive partnership that I think we need to have and that I will promote and make possible as president .
Now , I 'm happy to answer some questions . Thank you !
Thank you . Thank you all so much . Thank you .
Thank you . It 's great to be here with all of you .
I 'm looking out at the audience and seeing so many familiar faces , as well as those here up on the dais .
I want to thank Kevin for his introduction and his leadership of this organization .
Mayor Lee , thanks for having us in your beautiful city .
It is for me a great treat to come back to address a group that , as you just heard , I spent a lot of time as Senator working with , in great measure because of the need for buttressing Homeland Security , as well as other challenges within our cities during the eight years I served in the Senate .
And it was always refreshing to come here because despite whatever was going on in Congress or Washington with respect to partisanship , a conference of mayors was truly like an oasis in the desert .
I could come here and be reminded of what Mayor LaGuardia said ,
There 's no Republican or Democratic way to pick up the garbage .
You pick it up , or you don't pick it up .
And I loved being with people who understood that . I 've learned over the years how important it is to work with city hall , to try to make sure we are connected up as partners and to get whatever the priorities of your people happen to be accomplished .
So it pays . It pays to work with you , and I am grateful to have this opportunity to come back and see you .
When I was Senator from New York , I not only worked with the mayor of New York City , of course , I worked with creative and committed mayors from Buffalo to Rochester to Syracuse to Albany and so many other places .
And I was particularly happy to do so because they were always full of ideas and eager to work together to attract more high-paying jobs , to revitalize downtowns , to support our first responders , to try to close that skills gap .
And I want you to be sure of this , whether you are a Democrat , a Republican or an Independent : If I am President , America 's mayors will always have a friend in the White House .
Now , as I was preparing to come here , I couldn't help but think of some of those who aren't with us today .
Tom Menino was a dear friend to me , and to many in this room , and I certainly feel his loss .
Today , our thoughts are also with our friend Joe Riley and the people of Charleston .
Joe 's a good man and a great mayor , and his leadership has been a bright light during such a dark time .
You know , the passing of days has not dulled the pain or the shock of this crime .
Indeed , as we have gotten to know the faces and names and stories of the victims , the pain has only deepened .
Nine faithful women and men , with families and passions and so much left to do .
As a mother , a grandmother , a human being , just as a fellow human being , my heart is bursting for them , for these victims and their families , for a wounded community and a wounded church , for our country struggling once again to make sense of violence that is fundamentally senseless , and history we desperately want to leave behind .
Yesterday was Juneteenth , a day of liberation and deliverance .
One-hundred and fifty years ago , as news of President Lincoln 's Emancipation Proclamation spread from town to town across the South , free men and women lifted their voices in song and prayer .
Congregations long forced to worship underground , like the first Christians , joyfully resurrected their churches .
In Charleston , the African Methodist Episcopal Church took a new name : Emanuel .
God is with us . Faith has always seen this community through , and I know it will again .
Just as earlier generations threw off the chains of slavery and then segregation and Jim Crow , this generation will not be shackled by fear and hate .
On Friday , one by one , grieving parents and siblings stood up in court and looked at that young man , who had taken so much from them , and said : I forgive you .
In its way , their act of mercy was as stunning as his act of cruelty .
It reminded me of watching Nelson Mandela embrace his former jailors because , he said , he didn't want to be imprisoned twice , once by steel and concrete , once by anger and bitterness .
In these moments of tragedy , many of us struggle with how to process the rush of emotions .
I 'd been in Charleston that day . I 'd gone to a technical school , Trident Tech .
I had seen the joy , the confidence and optimism of young people who were now serving apprenticeships with local businesses , black , white , Hispanic , Asian , every background .
I listened to their stories , I shook their hands , I saw the hope and the pride .
And then by the time I got to Las Vegas , I read the news .
Like many of you , I was so overcome , how to turn grief , confusion into purpose and action .
But that 's what we have to do . For me and many others , one immediate response was to ask how it could be possible that we as a nation still allow guns to fall into the hands of people whose hearts are filled with hate .
You can't watch massacre after massacre and not come to the conclusion that , as President Obama said , we must tackle this challenge with urgency and conviction .
Now , I lived in Arkansas and I represented Upstate New York .
I know that gun ownership is part of the fabric of a lot of law-abiding communities .
But I also know that we can have common sense gun reforms that keep weapons out of the hands of criminals and the violently unstable , while respecting responsible gun owners .
What I hope with all of my heart is that we work together to make this debate less polarized , less inflamed by ideology , more informed by evidence , so we can sit down across the table , across the aisle from one another , and find ways to keep our communities safe while protecting constitutional rights .
It makes no sense that bipartisan legislation to require universal background checks would fail in Congress , despite overwhelming public support .
It makes no sense that we wouldn't come together to keep guns out of the hands of domestic abusers , or people suffering from mental illnesses , even people on the terrorist watch list .
That doesn't make sense , and it is a rebuke to this nation we love and care about .
The President is right , the politics on this issue have been poisoned .
But we can't give up . The stakes are too high .
The costs are too dear . And I am not and will not be afraid to keep fighting for common sense reforms , and along with you achieve those on behalf of all who have been lost because of this senseless gun violence in our country .
But today , I stand before you because I know and you know there is a deeper challenge we face .
I had the great privilege of representing America around the world .
I was so proud to share our example , our diversity , our openness , our devotion to human rights and freedom .
These qualities have drawn generations of immigrants to our shores , and they inspire people still .
I have seen it with my own eyes . And yet , bodies are once again being carried out of a black church .
Once again , racist rhetoric has metastasized into racist violence .
Now , it 's tempting , it is tempting to dismiss a tragedy like this as an isolated incident , to believe that in today 's America , bigotry is largely behind us , that institutionalized racism no longer exists .
But despite our best efforts and our highest hopes , America 's long struggle with race is far from finished .
I know this is a difficult topic to talk about .
I know that so many of us hoped by electing our first black president , we had turned the page on this chapter in our history .
I know there are truths we don't like to say out loud or discuss with our children .
But we have to . That 's the only way we can possibly move forward together .
Race remains a deep fault line in America . Millions of people of color still experience racism in their everyday lives .
Here are some facts . In America today , blacks are nearly three times as likely as whites to be denied a mortgage .
In 2013 , the median the median wealth of black families was around $ 11,000 .
For white families , it was more than $ 134,000 .
Nearly half of all black families have lived in poor neighborhoods for at least two generations , compared to just 7 percent of white families .
African American men are far more likely to be stopped and searched by police , charged with crimes , and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men , 10 percent longer for the same crimes in the federal system .
In America today , our schools are more segregated than they were in the 1960s .
How can any of that be true ? How can it be true that black children are 500 percent more likely to die from asthma than white kids ?
Five hundred percent ! More than a half century after Dr. King marched and Rosa Parks sat and John Lewis bled , after the Civil Rights Act and the Voting Rights Act and so much else , how can any of these things be true ?
But they are . And our problem is not all kooks and Klansman .
It 's also in the cruel joke that goes unchallenged .
It 's in the off-hand comments about not wanting those people in the neighborhood .
Let 's be honest : For a lot of well-meaning , open-minded white people , the sight of a young black man in a hoodie still evokes a twinge of fear .
And news reports about poverty and crime and discrimination evoke sympathy , even empathy , but too rarely do they spur us to action or prompt us to question our own assumptions and privilege .
We can't hide from any of these hard truths about race and justice in America .
We have to name them and own them and then change them .
You may have heard about a woman in North Carolina named Debbie Dills .
She 's the one who spotted Dylann Roof 's car on the highway .
She could have gone on about her business . She could have looked to her own safety .
But that 's not what she did . She called the police and then she followed that car for more than 30 miles .
As Congressman Jim Clyburn said the other day , There may be a lot of Dylann Roofs in the world , but there are a lot of Debbie Dills too .
She didn't remain silent . Well , neither can we .
We all have a role to play in building a more tolerant , inclusive society , what I once called a village , where there is a place for everyone .
You know , we Americans may differ and bicker and stumble and fall , but we are at our best when we pick each other up , when we have each other 's back .
Like any family , our American family is strongest when we cherish what we have in common , and fight back against those who would drive us apart .
Mayors are on the front lines in so many ways .
We look to you for leadership in time of crisis .
We look to you every day to bring people together to build stronger communities .
Many mayors are part of the U.S. Coalition of Cities against Racism and Discrimination , launched by this conference in 2013 .
I know you 're making reforms in your own communities , promoting tolerance in schools , smoothing the integration of immigrants , creating economic opportunities .
Mayors across the country also are doing all they can to prevent gun violence and keep our streets and neighborhoods safe .
And that 's not all . Across our country , there is so much that is working .
It 's easy to forget that when you watch or read the news .
In cities and towns from coast to coast , we are seeing incredible innovation .
Mayors are delivering results with what Franklin Roosevelt called bold and persistent experimentation .
Here in San Francisco , Mayor Lee is expanding a workforce training program for residents of public housing , helping people find jobs who might have spent time in prison or lost their driver 's license or fallen behind in child support payments .
South of here in Los Angeles and north in Seattle , city governments are raising the minimum wage so more people who work hard can get ahead and support their families .
In Philadelphia , Mayor Nutter is pioneering a new approach to community policing to rebuild trust and respect between law enforcement and communities of color .
In Houston , Louisville , and Chicago , the mayors are finding new ways to help workers train and compete for jobs in advanced industries .
Cities like Cleveland and Lexington are linking up their universities and their factories to spur a revival of manufacturing .
In Denver and Detroit , city leaders are getting creative about how they raise funds for building and repairing mass transit .
Providence is helping parents learn how to become their children 's first teachers , and spend more time reading , talking , and singing to their babies at critical stages of early brain development .
Kevin Johnson , who has led both Sacramento and this conference so ably , calls this renaissance of urban innovation
Cities 3.0 , and talks about open-source leadership and mayors as pragmatic problem-solvers .
That 's what we need more of in America . And Kevin is right , we need to reimagine the relationship between the federal government and our metropolitan areas .
Top-down , one-size-fits-all solutions rarely work . We need what I 'll call a new Flexible Federalism that empowers and connects communities , leverages their unique advantages , adapts to changing circumstances .
And I look forward to working with all of you to turn this vision into a reality .
I 've put Four Fights at the center of my campaign :
First , to build an economy for tomorrow not yesterday ;
Second , to strengthen America 's families , the foundation of everything we are ;
Third , to harness all of our power , our smarts , and our values to continue to lead the world ;
And fourth , to revitalize our democracy back here at home .
Mayors are vital for all four of these efforts . You know what it takes to make government actually work , and you know it can make a real difference in people 's lives .
But you also know that government alone does not have the answers we seek .
If we are going to re-stitch the fraying fabric of our communities , all Americans are going to have to step up .
There are laws we should pass and programs we should fund and fights we should wage and win .
But so much of the real work is going to come around kitchen tables and over bedtime stories , around office watercoolers and in factory break rooms , at quiet moments in school and at work , in honest conversations between parents and children , between friends and neighbors .
Because fundamentally , this is about the habits of our hearts , how we treat each other , how we learn to see the humanity in those around us , no matter what they look like , how they worship , or who they love .
Most of all , it 's about how we teach our children to see that humanity too .
Andy Young is here , and I want to tell a story about him because I think it 's as timely today as it was all those years ago .
You know , at the end of the 1950s the South was beginning to find its way into the modern economy .
It wasn't easy . There were determined leaders in both government and business that wanted to raise the standard of living and recruit businesses , make life better .
When the closing of Central High School in Little Rock happened , and President Eisenhower had to send in federal troops to keep peace , that sent a message of urgency but also opportunity .
I remember Andy coming to Little Rock some years later , and saying that in Atlanta when folks saw what was going on in Little Rock and saw some of the continuing resistance to enforcing civil rights laws , opening up closed doors , creating the chance for blacks and whites to study together , to work together , to live together , Atlanta made a different decision .
The leadership of Atlanta came together , looked out across the South and said ,
Some place in the South is really going to make it big .
We need to be that place . And they adopted a slogan , the city too busy to hate .
Well , we need to be cities , states and a country too busy to hate .
We need to get about the work of tearing down the barriers and the obstacles , roll up our sleeves together , look at what 's working across our country , and then share it and scale it .
As all of us reeled from the news in Charleston this past week , a friend of mine shared this observation with a number of us .
Think about the hearts and values of those men and women of Mother Emanuel , he said .
A dozen people gathered to pray . They 're in their most intimate of communities and a stranger who doesn't look or dress like them joins in .
They don't judge . They don't question . They don't reject .
They just welcome . If he 's there , he must need something : prayer , love , community , something .
During their last hour , nine people of faith welcomed a stranger in prayer and fellowship .
For those of us who are Christians , we remember the words of the scripture :
I was hungry and you gave me food . I was thirsty and you gave me drink .
I was a stranger and you welcomed me . That 's humanity at its best .
That 's also America at its best . And that 's the spirit we need to nurture our lives and our families and our communities .
I know it 's not usual for somebody running for president to say what we need more of in this country is love and kindness .
But that 's exactly what we need more of . We need to be not only too busy to hate but too caring , too loving to ignore , to walk away , to give up .
Part of the reason I 'm running for president is I love this country .
I am so grateful for each and every blessing and opportunity I 've been given .
I did not pick my parents . I did not decide before I arrived that I would live in a middle class family in the middle of America , be given the opportunity to go to good public schools with dedicated teachers and a community that supported me and all of the other kids .
I came of age at a time when barriers were falling for women , another benefit .
I came of age as the Civil Rights movement was beginning to not only change laws but change hearts .
I 've seen the expansion of not just rights but opportunities to so many of our fellow men and women who had been left out and left behind .
But we have unfinished business . And I am absolutely confident and optimistic we can get that done .
I stand here ready to work with each and every one of you to support your efforts , to stand with you , to put the task of moving beyond the past at the head of our national agenda .
I 'm excited about what we can accomplish together . I thank you for what you 've already done and I look forward to all that you will be doing in the future .
Thank you . God bless you , and God bless America .
Hillary outlined the central economic challenge in America today : stronger and steadier income growth .
While corporate profits are near record highs , everyday Americans ' paychecks have barely budged .
She laid out her vision for raising incomes for hard-working Americans so they can afford a middle-class life through strong growth , fair growth , and long-term growth .
Additionally , she called for giving workers the chance to share in the profits they help produce .
Thank you , thank you , thank you so much .
Thank you very much President Van Zandt , and thanks to everyone at the New School for welcoming us today .
I 'm delighted to be back . You know , over the past few months I 've had the opportunity to listen to Americans ' concerns about an economy that still isn't delivering for them .
It 's not delivering the way it should it still seems to most Americans that I have spoken with that it is stacked for those at the top .
But I 've also heard their hopes for the future : going to college without drowning in debt , starting that small business they 've always dreamed about , getting a job that pays well enough to support a family and provide for a secure retirement .
Previous generations of Americans built the greatest economy and strongest middle class the world has ever known on the promise of a basic bargain , that if you work hard and do your part , you should be able to get ahead .
And when you get ahead , America gets ahead . But over several decades , that bargain has eroded .
Our job is to make it strong again . For 35 years , republicans have argued that if we give more wealth to those at the top by cutting their taxes and letting big corporations write their own rules it will trickle down , it will trickle down to everyone else .
Yet every time they have a chance to try that approach , it explodes the national debt , concentrates wealth even more , and does practically nothing to help hard-working Americans .
Twice now in the past 20 years , a democratic president has had to come in and clean up the mess .
I think the results speak for themselves . Under President Clinton I like the sound of that America saw the longest peacetime expansion in history , nearly 23 million jobs , a balanced budget , and a surplus for the future .
And most importantly , incomes rose across the board , not just for those already at the top .
Eight years later , President Obama and the American people 's hard work pulled us back from the brink of depression .
President Obama saved the auto industry , imposed new rules on Wall Street , and provided healthcare to 16 million Americans .
Now , today as the shadow of crisis recedes and longer-term challenges come into focus , I believe we have to build a growth and fairness economy .
You can't have one without the other . We can't create enough jobs and new businesses without more growth , and we can't build strong families and support our consumer economy without more fairness .
We need both , because while America is standing again , we 're not yet running the way we should .
Corporate profits are at near-record highs and Americans are working as hard as ever , but paychecks have barely budged in real terms .
Families today are stretched in so many directions , and so are their budgets .
Out-of-pocket costs of health care , childcare , caring for aging parents are rising a lot faster than wages .
I hear this everywhere I go . The single mom who talked to me about juggling a job and classes at community college , while raising three kids , she doesn't expect anything to come easy , but if she got a raise , everything wouldn't be quite so hard .
The grandmother who works around the clock providing childcare to other people 's kids , she 's proud of her work but the pay is barely enough to live on , especially with the soaring price of her prescription drugs .
The young entrepreneur whose dream of buying the bowling alley where he worked as a teenager was nearly derailed by his student debt , if he can grow his business , he 'll be able to pay off his debt and pay his employees , including himself , more too .
Millions of hard-working Americans tell similar stories : wages need to rise to keep up with costs , paychecks need to grow , and families who work hard and do their part deserve to get ahead and stay ahead .
The defining economic challenge of our time is clear : we must raise incomes for hard-working Americans so they can afford a middle-class life .
We must drive strong and steady income growth that lifts up families and lifts up our country .
And that will be my mission from the first day I 'm president , to the last .
I will get up everyday thinking about the families of America , like the family that I came from with a hard working dad who started a small business and scrimped and saved and gave us a good middle class life .
I 'll be thinking about all the people that I represented here in New York , and the stories that they told me and that I worked with them to improve .
And I will , as your president , take on this challenge against the backdrop of major changes in our economy and the global economy that didn't start with the recession and won't end with the recovery .
You know advances in technology and expanding global trade have created whole new areas of commercial activity and opened new markets for our exports , but too often they 're also polarizing our economy benefiting high-skilled workers but displacing or downgrading blue collar jobs and other mid-level jobs that used to provide solid incomes for millions of Americans .
Today 's marketplace focuses too much on the short term like second-to-second financial trading and quarterly earnings reports and too little on long-term investments .
Meanwhile , many Americans are making extra money renting out a spare room , designing websites , selling products they design themselves at home , or even driving their own car .
This on demand or so-called gig economy is creating exciting opportunities and unleashing innovation , but it 's also raising hard questions about workplace protections and what a good job will look like in the future .
So all of these trends are real , and none , none is going away .
But they don't determine our destiny . The choices we make as a nation matter .
And the choices we make in the years ahead will set the stage for what American life in the middle class in our economy will be like in this century .
As president , I will work with every possible partner to turn the tide .
To make these currents of change start working for us more than against us .
To strengthen not hollow out the American middle class .
Because I think at our best , that 's what Americans do .
We 're problem solvers , not deniers . We don't hide from change , we harness it .
The measure of our success must be how much incomes rise for hard-working families , not just for successful CEOs and money managers .
And not just some arbitrary growth target untethered to people 's lives and livelihoods , I want to see our economy work for the struggling , the striving , and the successful .
We 're not going to find all the answers we need today in the playbooks of the past .
We can't go back to the old policies that failed us before .
Nor can we just replay previous successes . Today is not 1993 or 2009 .
We need solutions for the big challenges we face now .
So today I am proposing an agenda to raise incomes for hard-working Americans .
An agenda for strong growth , fair growth , and long-term growth .
Let me begin with strong growth . More growth means more jobs and more new businesses .
More jobs give people choices about where to work . And employers have to offer higher wages and better benefits in order to compete with each other to hire new workers and keep the productive ones .
That 's why economists tell us that getting closer to full employment is crucial for raising incomes .
Small businesses create more than 60 percent of new American jobs on net .
So they have to be a top priority . I 've said I want to be the small business president , and
I mean it . And throughout this campaign I 'm going to be talking about how we empower entrepreneurs with less red tape , easier access to capital , and tax relief .
I 'll also push for broader business tax reform to spur investment in America , closing those loopholes that reward companies for sending jobs and profits overseas .
And I know it 's not always how we think about this , but another engine of strong growth should be comprehensive immigration reform .
I want you to hear this : Bringing millions of hard-working people into the formal economy would increase our gross domestic product by an estimated $700 billion over 10 years .
Then there are the new public investments that will help established businesses and entrepreneurs create the next generation of high-paying jobs .
You know when we get Americans moving , we get our country moving .
So let 's establish an infrastructure bank that can channel more public and private funds , channel those funds to finance world-class airports , railways , roads , bridges and ports .
And let 's build those faster broadband networks and make sure there 's a greater diversity of providers so consumers have more choice .
And really , there 's no excuse not to make greater investments in cleaner , renewable energy right now .
Our economy obviously runs on energy . And the time has come to make America the world 's clean energy superpower .
I advocate that because these investments will create millions of jobs , save us money in the long run , and help us meet the threats of climate change .
And let 's fund the scientific and medical research that spawns innovative companies and creates entire new industries , just as the project to sequence the human genome did in the 1990s , and President Obama 's initiatives on precision medicine and brain research will do in the coming years .
I will set ambitious goals in all of these areas in the months ahead .
But today , let me emphasize another key ingredient of strong growth that often goes overlooked and undervalued : breaking down barriers so more Americans participate more fully in the workforce especially women .
We are in a global competition , as I 'm sure you have noticed , and we can't afford to leave talent on the sidelines , but that 's exactly what we 're doing today .
When we leave people out , or write them off , we not only shortchange them and their dreams we shortchange our country and our future .
The movement of women into the workforce over the past forty years was responsible for more than three and a half trillion dollars in economic growth .
But that progress has stalled . The United States used to rank 7th out of 24 advanced countries in women 's labor force participation .
By 2013 , we had dropped to 19th . That represents a lot of unused potential for our economy and for American families .
Studies show that nearly a third of this decline relative to other countries is because they 're expanding family-friendly policies like paid leave and we are not .
We should be making it easier for Americans to be both good workers and good parents and caregivers .
Women who want to work should be able to do so without worrying every day about how they 're going to take care of their children , or what will happen if a family member gets sick .
You know , last year while I was at the hospital here in Manhattan waiting for little Charlotte to make her grand entrance , one of the nurses said ,
Thank you for fighting for paid leave . And we began to talk about it .
She sees first-hand what it means for herself and her colleagues as well as for the working parents that she helps take care of .
It 's time to recognize that quality , affordable childcare is not a it 's a growth strategy .
And it 's way past time to end the outrage of so many women still earning less than men on the job and women of color making even less .
All this lost money adds up and for some women , it 's thousands of dollars every year .
Now I am well aware that for far too long , these challenges have been dismissed by some as women 's issues .
Well those days are over . Fair pay and fair scheduling , paid family leave and earned sick days , and child care are essential to our competitiveness and growth .
And we can do this in a way that doesn't impose unfair burdens on businesses especially small businesses .
As president , I 'll fight to put families first just like I have my entire career .
Now , beyond strong growth , we also need fair growth .
And that will be the second key driver of rising incomes .
The evidence is in , inequality is a drag on our entire economy , so this is the problem we need to tackle .
You may have heard Governor Bush say last week that Americans just need to work longer hours .
Well , he must not have met very many American workers .
Let him tell that to the nurse who stands on her feet all day or the trucker who drives all night .
Let him tell that to the fast food workers marching in the streets for better pay .
They don't need a lecture they need a raise .
The truth is , the current rules for our economy reward some work like financial trading much more than other work like actually building and selling things the work that 's always been the backbone of our economy .
To get all incomes rising again , we need to strike a better balance .
If you work hard , you ought to be paid fairly .
So we have to raise the minimum wage and implement President Obama 's new rules on overtime .
And then we have to go further . I 'll crack down on bosses who exploit employees by misclassifying them as contractors or even steal their wages .
To make paychecks stretch , we need to take on the major strains on family budgets .
I 'll protect the Affordable Care Act and build on it to lower out-of-pocket health care costs and to make prescription drugs more affordable .
We 'll help families look forward to retirement by defending and enhancing Social Security and making it easier to save for the future .
Now , many of these proposals are time-tested and more than a little battle-scarred .
We need new ideas as well . And one that I believe in and will fight for is profit sharing .
Hard working Americans deserve to benefit from the record corporate earnings they help produce .
So I will propose ways to encourage companies to share profits with their employees .
That 's good for workers and good for business . Studies show profit-sharing that gives everyone a stake in a company 's success can boost productivity and put money directly into employees ' pockets .
It 's a win-win . Later this week in New Hampshire , I 'll have more to say about how we do this .
Another priority must be reforming our tax code . Now , we hear Republican candidates talk a lot about tax reform .
But take a good look at their plans . Senator Rubio 's would cut taxes for households making around $3 million a year by almost $ 240,000 which is way more than three times the earnings of a typical family .
Well , that 's a sure budget-busting give-away to the super-wealthy .
And that 's the kind of bad economics you 're likely to get from any of the candidates on the other side .
I have a different take , guided by some simple principles .
First , hard-working families need and deserve tax relief and simplification .
Second , those at the top have to pay their fair share .
That 's why I support the Buffett Rule , which makes sure that millionaires don't pay lower rates than their secretaries .
I have also called for closing the carried interest loophole , which lets wealthy financiers pay an artificially low rate .
And let 's agree that hugely successful companies that benefit from everything America has to offer should not be able to game the system and avoid paying their fair share , especially while companies who can't afford high-price lawyers and lobbyists end up paying more .
Alongside tax reform , it 's time to stand up to efforts across our country to undermine worker bargaining power , which has been proven again and again to drive up wages .
Republicans governors like Scott Walker have made their names stomping on workers ' rights .
And practically all the republican candidates hope to do the same as president .
I will fight back against these mean-spirited , misguided attacks .
Evidence shows that the decline of unions may be responsible for a third of the increase of inequality among men .
So if we want to get serious about raising incomes , we have to get serious about supporting workers .
And let me just say a word here about trade .
The Greek crisis as well as the Chinese stock market have reminded us that growth here at home and growth an ocean away are linked in a common global economy .
Trade has been a major driver of the economy over recent decades but it has also contributed to hollowing out our manufacturing base and many hard-working communities .
So we do need to set a high bar for trade agreements .
We should support them if they create jobs , raise wages , and advance our national security .
And we should be prepared to walk away if they don't .
To create fair growth , we need to create opportunity for more Americans .
I love the saying by Abraham Lincoln , who in many ways was not only the president who saved our union , but the president who understood profoundly the importance of the middle class , and the importance of the government playing its role in providing opportunities .
He talked about giving Americans a fair chance in the race of life .
I believe that with all my heart . But I also believe it has to start really early at birth .
High quality early learning , especially in the first five years , can set children on the course for future success and raise lifetime incomes by 25 percent .
I 'm committed to seeing every 4-year old in America have access to high-quality preschool in the next ten years .
But I want to do more , I want to call for a great outpouring of support from our faith community , our business community , our academic institutions , from philanthropy and civic groups and concerned citizens to really help parents , particularly parents who are facing a lot of obstacles , to really help prepare their own children in that zero to four age group .
80 percent of your brain is physically formed by age of three .
That 's why families like mine read , talk , and sing endlessly to our granddaughter .
I 've said that her first words are going to be enough with the reading , and the talking , and the singing .
But we do it not only because we love doing it , even though I 'll admit it 's a little embarrassing to be reading a book to a two-week old , or a six-week old , a ten-week old .
But we do it because we understand that it 's building her capacity for learning .
And the research shows that by the time she enters kindergarten she will have heard 30 million more words than I child from a less privileged background .
We also have to invest in our students and teachers at every level .
In the coming weeks and months , I 'll lay out specific steps to improve our schools , make college truly affordable , and help Americans refinance their student debt .
Let 's embrace the idea of lifelong learning . In an age of technological change , we need to provide pathways to get skills and credentials for new occupations , and create online platforms to connect workers to jobs .
There are exciting efforts underway and I want to support and scale the ones that show results .
As we pursue all these policies , we can't forget our fellow Americans hit so hard and left behind by this changing economy from the inner cities to coal country to Indian country .
Talent is universal you find it everywhere but opportunity is not .
There are nearly 6 million young people aged 16 to 24 in America today who are not in school or at work .
The numbers for young people of color are particularly staggering .
A quarter of young black men and nearly 15 percent of all Latino youth cannot find a job .
We 've got to find a better way of coming up to match the growing middle class incomes we want to generate with more pathways into the middle class .
I firmly believe that the best anti-poverty program is a job , but that 's hard to say if there are not enough jobs for people that we are trying to help lift themselves out of poverty .
That 's why I 've called for reviving the New Markets Tax Credit and Empowerment Zones to create greater incentives to invest in poor and remote areas .
When all Americans have the chance to study hard , work hard , and share in our country 's that 's fair growth .
It 's what I 've always believed in and it 's what I will fight for as president .
Now , the third key driver of income alongside strong growth and fair growth must be long-term growth .
Too many pressures in our economy today push us toward shor t-t ermism .
Many business leaders see this . They 've talked to me about it .
One has called it the problem of quarterly capitalism .
They say everything 's focused on the next earnings report or the shor t-t erm share price .
The result is too little attention on the sources of long-term growth : research and development , physical capital , and talent .
Net business investment which includes things like factories , machines , and research labs has declined as a share of the economy .
In recent years , some of our biggest companies have spent more than half of their earnings to buy back their own stock , and another third or more to pay dividends .
That doesn't leave a lot left to raise pay or invest in the workers who made those profits possible or to make the new investments necessary to insure a company 's future success .
These trends need to change . And I believe that many business leaders are eager to embrace their responsibilities , not just to today 's share price but also to workers , communities , and ultimately to our country and indeed our planet .
I 'm not talking about I 'm talking about clear-eyed capitalism .
Many companies have prospered by improving wages and training their workers that then yield higher productivity , better service , and larger profits .
Now it 's easy to try to cut costs by holding down or decreasing pay and other investments to inflate quarterly stock prices , but I would argue that 's bad for business in the long run .
And , it 's really bad for our country . Workers are assets .
Investing in them pays off . Higher wages pay off .
And training pays off . To help more companies do that
, I 've proposed a new $ 1,500 apprenticeship tax credit for every worker they train and hire .
And I will soon be proposing a new plan to reform capital gains taxes to reward longer-term investments that create jobs more than just quick trades .
I will also propose reforms to help CEOs and shareholders alike focus on the next decade rather than just the next day .
Making sure stock buybacks aren't being used only for an immediate boost in share prices . Empowering outside investors who want to build companies but discouraging cut and run shareholders who act more like old-school corporate raiders .
And nowhere will the shift from shor t-t erm to long-term be more important than on Wall Street .
As a former Senator from New York , I know first-hand the role that Wall Street can and should play in our economy helping Main Street grow and prosper and boosting new companies that make America more competitive globally .
But , as we all know , in the years before the crash , financial firms piled risk upon risk .
And regulators in Washington either couldn't or wouldn't keep up .
I was alarmed by this gathering storm , and called for addressing the risks of derivatives , cracking down on subprime mortgages , and improving financial oversight .
Under President Obama 's leadership , we 've imposed tough new rules that deal with some of the challenges on Wall Street .
But those rules have been under assault by republicans in congress and those running for president .
I will fight back against these attacks and protect the reforms we 've made .
We can do that and still ease burdens on community banks to encourage responsible loans to local people and businesses they know and trust .
We also have to go beyond Dodd-Frank . Too many of our major financial institutions are still too complex and too risky .
And the problems are not limited to the big banks that get all the headlines .
Serious risks are emerging from institutions in the so-called shadow banking
system including hedge funds , high frequency traders , non-bank finance companies so many new kinds of entities which receive little oversight at all .
Stories of misconduct by individuals and institutions in the financial industry are shocking .
HSBC allowing drug cartels to launder money . Five major banks pleading guilty to felony charges for conspiring to manipulate currency exchange and interest rates .
There can be no justification or tolerance for this kind of criminal behavior .
And while institutions have paid large fines and in some cases admitted guilt , too often it has seemed that the human beings responsible get off with limited consequences or none at all , even when they 've already pocketed the gains .
This is wrong and , on my watch , it will change .
Over the course of this campaign , I will offer plans to rein in excessive risks on Wall Street and ensure that stock markets work for everyday investors , not just high frequency traders and those with the best or fastest connections .
I will appoint and empower regulators who understand that Too Big To Fail is still too big a problem .
We 'll ensure that no firm is too complex to manage or oversee .
And we will prosecute individuals as well as firms when they commit fraud or other criminal wrongdoing .
And when the government recovers money from corporations or individuals for harming the public , it should go into a separate trust fund to benefit the public .
It , could for example , help modernize infrastructure or even be returned directly to taxpayers .
Now , reform is never easy . But we have done it before in our country .
But we have to get this right . And we need leadership from the financial industry and across the private sector to join with us .
Two years ago , the head of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange , Terry Duffy , published an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal that really caught my attention .
He wrote , and I quote : I 'm concerned that those of us in financial services have forgotten who we serve and that the public knows it .
Some wall streeters can too easily slip into regarding their work as a kind of money-making game divorced from the concerns of Main Street .
I think we should listen to Terry Duffy . Of course , long-term growth is only possible if the public sector steps up as well .
So it 's time to end the era of budget brinksmanship and stop careening from one self-inflicted crisis to another .
It 's time to stop having debates over the small stuff and focus on how we 're going to tackle the big stuff together :
How do we respond to technological change in a way that creates more good jobs than it displaces or destroys ?
Can we sustain a boom in advanced manufacturing ? What are the best ways to nurture start-ups outside the successful corridors like Silicon Valley ?
Questions like these demand thoughtful and mature debate from our policy makers in government , from our leaders in the private sector , and our economists , our academics , and others who can come to the table on behalf of America and perform their patriotic duty to ensure that our economy keeps working and our middle class keeps growing .
So government has to be smarter , simpler , more focused itself on long-term investments than shor t-t erm politics and be a better partner to cities , states , and the private sector .
Washington has to be a better steward of America 's tax-dollars and Americans ' trust .
And please let 's get back to making decisions that rely on evidence more than ideology .
That 's what I 'll do as president . I will seek out and welcome any good idea that is actually based on reality .
I want to have principled and pragmatic and progressive policies that really move us forward together , and I will propose ways to ensure that our fiscal outlook is sustainable including by continuing to restrain health care costs , which remain one of the key drivers of long-term deficits .
I will make sure Washington learns from how well local governments , business , and nonprofits are working together in successful cities and towns across America .
You know passing legislation is not the only way to drive progress .
As president , I 'll use the power to convene , connect , and collaborate to build partnerships that actually get things done .
Because above all , we have to break out of the poisonous partisan gridlock and focus on the long-term needs of our country .
I confess maybe it 's the grandmother in me , but I believe that part of public service is planting trees under whose shade you 'll never sit .
And the vision I 've laid out here today for strong growth , fair growth , and long term growth , all working together will get incomes rising again , will help working families get ahead and stay ahead .
That is the test of our time . And I 'm inviting everyone to please join me , to do your part , that 's what great countries do .
That 's what our country always has done . We rise to challenges .
It 's not about left , right , or it 's about the future versus the past .
I 'm running for president to build an America for tomorrow , not yesterday .
An America built on growth and fairness . An America where if you do your part , you will reap the rewards .
Where we don't leave anyone out , or anyone behind .
Thank you all . Thank you . I just want to leave you with one more thought .
I want every child , every child in our country , not just the granddaughter of a former president or a former secretary of state , but every child to have the chance to live up to his or her God-given potential .
Please join me in that mission . Let 's do it all together .
Thank you so much . Hillary laid out an agenda to move away from
quarterly capitalism , including reforming capital gains tax rates to reward farsighted investments that create jobs and discourage shor t-t ermism , empowering workers with a stronger voice , addressing activist shareholders and buybacks , and reforming executive compensation to better align the interests of management and executives with long-term company values .
As she said , these components are the start of a conversation between the public and private sector , management and labor , and stakeholders throughout the U.S. economy .
Thank you . Thank you . Hi . Hi . Thank you all very much .
Thank you . Thank you . Thank you . Thank you very , very much .
I want to tell you it 's wonderful being back here at NYU and
I thank you all for joining me today . Especially my good friend and former colleague , Congresswoman Carolyn Maloney .
Thank you so much Carolyn for coming . I am grateful for this opportunity to share some of my further thoughts about our economy and the work that our country needs to do in the years ahead .
First I want to say a word about what 's in the news today .
It 's because there have been a lot of inaccuracies , as Congressman Cummings made clear this morning .
Maybe the heat is getting to everybody . We all have a responsibility to get this right .
I have released 55,000 pages of emails . I have said repeatedly that I will answer questions before the House committee .
We are all accountable to the American people to get the facts right and I will do my part .
But I 'm also going to stay focused on the issues , particularly the big issues that really matter to American families .
Over the past few months , I 've had the pleasure of meeting young people all over our country .
Many came of age in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis and the deep recession that it caused .
The fallout from that crash has tempered their expectations for the future and left them clear-eyed about the challenges ahead the challenges they face and that America faces .
Yet , like generations of Americans before them , there is also undimmed optimism .
Today 's young people are preparing to enter an economy they know will be competitive , not just at home but globally .
They 're thinking about how they 'll find a good job after graduation that can help them get ahead and stay ahead .
The risk of a setback , or , potentially , another crisis , is never far from their minds .
But what inspires me is that they are undaunted by these challenges .
They 're seeking real opportunities and real rewards for the work that they put in .
And they 're hopeful that tomorrow will indeed be better than today .
I hear these stories everywhere I go . The hard work , grit , and sacrifices of people across our country that have brought us back and driven our recovery .
So yes , now we 're standing again , but we 're not yet running the way America should .
No country is better positioned to thrive in today 's global economy .
We have the most innovative , enterprising private sector and most talented workers anywhere in the world .
Yet while corporate profits are at near-record highs , paychecks for most people have barely budged in real terms .
And out-of-pocket costs of everything from health care to prescription drugs to childcare , to college , to caring for aging parents are all rising a lot faster than wages .
That then is putting a lot of pressure , enormous pressure on families and their budgets .
My mission from my first day as president to the last will be to raise the incomes of hard-working Americans so they can , once again , afford a middle-class life .
We need to end the wage stagnation that 's holding back our families and holding back our country .
This is the defining economic challenge not only of this election , but of our time .
It gets to the core of who we are as a nation the basic bargain of America :
If you work hard and do your part , you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead .
And when you get ahead , our country gets ahead too .
Last week at the New School , I laid out a broad economic agenda to raise incomes and build an economy that works for everyone , not just those already at the top .
It 's an agenda for strong growth , fair growth , and long-term growth .
In the days ahead , I will continue outlining plans in all these areas , from setting ambitious goals for new infrastructure and clean energy investments , to reining in excessive risk on Wall Street .
Today , I want to focus in particular on long-term growth .
Consider this fact : A survey of corporate executives found that more than half would hold off making a successful long-term investment if it meant missing a target in the next quarterly earnings report .
In another recent survey , more than 60 percent said the pressure to provide shor t-t erm returns had increased over the previous five years .
We also know that publicly-held companies facing pressure from shareholders are less likely to invest in growth opportunities than their privately-held counterparts .
Large public companies now return eight or nine out of every ten dollars they earn directly back to shareholders , either in the form of dividends or stock buybacks , which can temporarily boost share prices .
Last year , the total reached a record $900 billion .
That doesn't leave much money to build a new factory or a research lab , or to train workers , or to give them a raise .
In fact , according to the Wall Street Journal , between 2003 and 2013 , while typical companies in the S&P 500 doubled the share of cash flow they spent on dividends and stock buybacks , they actually cut capital expenditures on things like new plants and equipment .
As the founder of the investment management company Vanguard put it ,
A culture of shor t-t erm speculation has run rampant .
One other concerned business leader calls it quarterly capitalism .
Now , I understand that most CEOs are simply responding to very real pressures from shareholders and the market to turn in good quarterly numbers .
And investors are always looking for strong , reliable returns .
But it is clear that the system is out of balance the deck is stacked in too many ways and powerful pressures and incentives are pushing it even further out of balance .
Quarterly capitalism as developed over recent decades is neither legally required nor economically sound .
It 's bad for business , bad for wages , and bad for our economy .
And fixing it will be good for everyone . An increasing number of business leaders , investors , and academics are mobilizing to change the culture of boardrooms , classrooms , and trading floors and to better align incentives for long-term growth .
For the sake of our economy and our country , we need to stand with them .
Innovators like Google and SpaceX are investing in research that does little for today 's bottom line but may yield transformational benefits down the line .
Venture capitalists are patiently nurturing the next disruptive innovator . The Big Three automakers GM , Ford , and Chrysler are putting the memory of the crisis behind them and making new investments in factories and technologies of the future , including advanced batteries .
Companies like Trader Joe 's and QuikTrip that have prospered by investing in workers , increasing wages , and improving training are becoming industry models .
And large employers like Target and Starbucks have recently raised wages for entry-level workers and , thanks to pressure from workers , the trend has even extended to McDonald 's and Walmart .
Now you may have heard that I am a fan of Chipotle .
And it 's not just because of their burrito bowl .
Last month , the company announced it would provide paid sick days , paid vacation time , and tuition reimbursements to its par t-t ime employees .
These are all smart long-term investments that will and do pay off for companies , workers , and our society .
And they point to an important question for the future of our economy : How do we define shareholder value in the 21st century ?
Is it maximizing immediate returns or delivering long-term growth ? Of course we want to do both .
But today , too often the former comes at the expense of the latter .
Real value is lasting value . We all know that in our own lives .
I learned it watching my father sweat over the printing table in his small fabric shop in Chicago .
He scrimped and saved to build that business and provide for our family 's future .
It wasn't good enough to be secure for today . What mattered was tomorrow .
And what 's true in life is also true in business .
Real value comes from long-term growth , not shor t-t erm profits .
It comes from building companies , not stripping them ; from creating good jobs , not eliminating them ; from seeing workers as assets to cultivate , not costs to be cut .
American business needs to break free from the tyranny of today 's earning report so they can do what they do best : innovate , invest , and build tomorrow 's prosperity .
It 's time to start measuring value in terms of years , or the next decade , not just the next quarter .
That is one of the ways we can raise incomes , help families get ahead , and deliver real value for shareholders .
Now , there 's no single cause of quarterly capitalism , and therefore no single solution .
But there are smart , specific reforms that can be made by both the private and the public sectors that would better align market incentives for long-term growth .
Reforms that many forward thinking business leaders themselves have been calling for .
I 'll mention five areas of focus today , but this list should be the beginning of the discussion , not the end .
First , I am proposing a reform of taxes on capital gains the profits earned by the sale of stock and other assets to promote and reward farsighted investments .
The current definition of a long-term holding period just one year is woefully inadequate .
That may count as long term for my baby granddaughter , but not for the American economy .
It 's no way to run a tax system . So as president , I would move to a six-year sliding scale that provides real incentives for long-term investments .
For taxpayers in the top bracket families earning more than $ 465,000 a year any gains from selling stock in the first two years would be taxed just like ordinary income .
Then the rate would decrease each year until it returns to the current rate .
This means that from the moment investors buy into a company , they 'll be more focused on its future growth strategy , than its immediate profits and so will some executives who are paid in part with stock or stock options .
I will also be looking at ways to address very shor t-t erm trading , whether it 's conducted over days , hours , or even milliseconds .
And we should offer the chance to eliminate capital gains taxes altogether for certain long-term investments in small businesses , including innovative start-ups , and hard-hit communities , from inner-cities to the Rust Belt to coal country to Indian country .
This should go hand-in-hand with a revitalized and expanded New Market Tax Credit , which also encourages investment in poor or remote communities and helps prevent downward spirals after economic disruptions like plant closings or layoffs .
I want to see more investors helping unlock the potential of the family business that 's struggling to get back on its feet .
Or the start-up that 's on the verge of making it big .
Or the community that lost the factory where generations of families worked but now is eager to build a new future .
That 's long-term growth at its best . Now of course , I understand that these changes to the tax code alone will not shift investors ' focus from shor t-t erm to long-term overnight .
But I believe this reform is an important first step toward removing some of the incentives that push us toward quarterly capitalism .
And this will all be part of a broader reform of both individual and corporate taxes that I will be discussing later in the campaign .
Last week , I called for closing the carried interest loophole and implementing the Buffett Rule , which would make sure millionaires don't pay lower rates than their secretaries .
And in the months ahead , I 'll address other inequities and loopholes that distort business decisions and rig our tax code for those at the top .
The second area where action is needed is to address the influence of increasingly assertive shareholders determined to extract maximum profit in the minimum amount of time even at the expense of future growth .
Now , so-called activist shareholders can have a positive influence on companies .
It 's a good thing when investors put pressure on management to stay nimble and accountable , or press for social and environmental progress .
But that 's very different from these hit and run
activists whose goal is to force an immediate payout no matter how much it discourages and distracts management from pursuing strategies that would add the most long-term value for the company .
Even iconic businesses like Apple , or Procter & Gamble , or Dow Chemical have felt this pressure .
So we need a new generation of committed long-term investors to provide a counter-weight to the hit-and-run activists .
Now some institutional investors already are beginning to push back .
We need more pension funds and proxy advisory firms to do so as well .
Institutional investors control 70 percent of the shares in the largest 1,000 U.S. companies .
They have unmatched influence , and therefore an unmatched obligation to guide companies toward strategies and metrics focused on long-term value .
There are things government should do as well . As president , I would order a full review of regulations on shareholder activism , some of which haven't been reexamined in decades , let alone modernized to reflect changing realities in our economy .
We also have to take a hard look at stock buybacks .
Investors and regulators alike need more information about these transactions .
Capital markets work best when information is promptly and widely available to all .
Other advanced economies like the United Kingdom and Hong Kong require companies to disclose stock buybacks within one day .
But here in the United States , you can go an entire quarter without disclosing .
So let 's change that . And buybacks lead directly to the third area of focus : reforming executive compensation .
We cannot address the challenge of quarterly capitalism without making sure that incentives for CEOs and other executives are more focused on the long-term growth and strength of the companies they run and less on the shor t-t erm fluctuations in its share price .
Now I am all for rewarding CEOs well when their companies prosper and their employees also share in the rewards .
But there is something wrong when senior executives get rich while companies stutter and employees struggle .
There 's something wrong when corporate boards allow exorbitant pay packages that aren't based on credible assessments of executive performance or a company 's long-term interests .
Thirty years ago , top CEO 's made 50 times what a typical worker did .
Today they make 300 times more . That just doesn't make sense .
Previous generations of executives were just as talented and hard-working , and they managed to get by with much more reasonable compensation .
So have CEOs in other countries . It would be good for our economy and for our country if we get back to compensating all employees when productivity and profits increase , not just those at the top .
Now in the 1990s , there was an effort to tie executive compensation to company performance , including through the use of stock options .
But many stock-heavy pay packages have created a perverse incentive for executives to seek the big payouts that could come from a temporary rise in share price .
And we ended up encouraging some of the same shor t-t erm thinking we meant to discourage .
In addition , while the Dodd-Frank financial reform legislation passed in 2010 called for new regulations regarding disclosure of executive compensation , many rules have yet to be put in place .
That includes a requirement to publish the ratio between CEO pay and the paychecks of everyday employees .
There is no excuse for taking five years to get this done .
Workers have a right to know whether executive pay at their company has gotten out of balance and so does the public .
Now we need to take several steps here . Defend the Dodd-Frank Act from Republican attacks and finally get the promised rules on the books .
Reform the performance-based tax deductions for top executives . Expand disclosure requirements under the say-on-pay rule to include an explanation of how executive compensation will promote the long-term health of the company .
Now , a crucial fourth area for reform is how we empower workers and make sure they 're seen as the engines of growth that they are .
Research shows that well-paid and well-trained employees tend to work more efficiently , stay on the job longer , and provide better customer service .
But those rewards can be harder to measure than the immediate cost of payroll and training .
So under the pressure of quarterly capitalism , they 're often squandered .
Employer-funded job training has fallen by more than one-third in the past two decades , even as the premium on skilled workers has increased in a competitive global economy .
And even where training programs do exist , too few are focused on providing broadly applicable sectoral skills .
The decline of unions and worker bargaining power has led to a decline in worker voices in long-term decision-making at many companies .
And it 's no surprise that we 've seen corporate investment in human capital decline as well .
I think we need to start trying to reverse all of these trends .
As president , I will fight to defend workers ' rights and encourage more companies to invest in their employees .
In this campaign , I 've already proposed a $ 1,500 apprenticeship tax credit for every new worker that businesses train and hire , as well as a plan to encourage more companies to offer generous profit sharing programs .
I 've also called for raising the minimum wage and implementing President Obama 's new rules on overtime .
And let me add , I agree with New York 's proposal this week to raise wages for fast food workers to $15 an hour .
The national minimum wage is a floor and it needs to be raised .
But let 's also remember that the cost of living in Manhattan is different than in Little Rock and many other places .
So New York or Los Angeles or Seattle are right to go higher .
Now if we 're going to ask the private sector to invest in the long-term , let 's all face up to the fact that Washington may well be the worst offender of all when it comes to shor t-t erm thinking .
And this is the fifth area of reform that is desperately needed .
It 's time to end the era of budget brinksmanship in Congress and stop careening from one self-inflicted crisis to another .
That just creates more uncertainty for business , for investors , and for our country .
You know I 've been asking a lot of business leaders with whom I have talked ,
What are a couple of things you would love to see happen ?
And almost to a person , they always say , We need more predictability .
We have no idea what 's going to come out of Washington .
We can deal with whatever does but when we don't know , when it doesn't come , when there are stalemates , when there are government shutdowns that interferes with our business and particularly with our global business .
Which is kind of an obvious thing to say , but I hope people in Washington will pay attention .
And let 's stop pouring subsidies into industries that are already thriving like the giveaways in the tax code to the oil companies and start investing in the future to create millions of more new jobs in the new economy .
We should be making smart investments in infrastructure , innovation , education , and clean energy that will help businesses and entrepreneurs grow and create the next generation of high-paying jobs .
And we know the investments that would be made in these areas have very high returns .
There 's no excuse not to make them and to make them now .
For example , we should improve and make permanent the Research and Experimentation tax credit .
Every few years Congress has another squabble over whether to renew this credit .
They 've done it 16 times in the past thirty-five years .
Isn't it time we stopped kicking the can down the road and actually got down to doing the people 's business ?
And as important as the specific reforms I 've outlined here are , the truth is that the fight against quarterly capitalism cannot be won in Washington alone .
The private sector has to rise to this challenge . We 're already seeing a movement for change taking shape .
Investors , executives , and employees are all starting to step up .
Union leaders are investing their own pension funds in putting people to work to build tomorrow 's clean energy economy and they earn good returns doing that .
We need to build on this momentum . It 's time to return to an old fashioned idea : that companies ' responsibility to their shareholders also encompasses a responsibility to employees , customers , communities , and ultimately to our country and , yes , our planet .
The strength and legitimacy of American capitalism have always depended on its ability to create opportunities for hard-working families to get ahead , generation after generation .
We can't lose sight of that . I 'm pleased that since 2010 , 31 states have enacted legislation authorizing so-called benefit corporations , which allow companies to pursue both profit and social purpose .
Senator Mark Warner has suggested that we recognize a new corporate form and reward companies that invest in their workers .
That proposal has real merit and we should explore it further .
What 's good for middle class families also happens to be good economics .
We know that strong , sustainable growth can only happen when communities are thriving and workers are well paid .
And after all our economy is a 70 percent consumption economy .
It 's that old Henry Ford story , when he decided he was going to be paying his workers , as I recall , the princely sum of $5 a day and a lot of his peers really rose up in opposition :
How can you do this ? You 're going to throw off the labor market .
You 're setting a bad example . And his response was ,
I 'm building these cars , I need people to buy them .
Well our economy is not yet running the way it should in large measure because we 're not putting enough money in the paychecks of enough Americans so that they in turn can be fueling this consumption economy , which not only holds up the American economy , but holds up the global economy .
It 's in everyone 's interest including Corporate America'sto contribute to a vibrant middle class and rising incomes .
Now as president , I won't try to impose a one-size-fits-all solution .
But I will use the power , the convening power of the office to bring all relevant parties together to help move our corporate culture toward solid long-term growth and investment .
Just imagine how different our history would have been if shor t-t ermism had dominated earlier eras the way it does today .
What if an activist hedge fund had persuaded AT&T to maximize cash flow and close Bell Labs before the transistor or the laser was invented there ?
What if Xerox had decided that its Palo Alto research park wasn't doing enough to boost share prices in the short term .
A young Steve Jobs would never have visited and the personal computer revolution might not have happened .
What if Congressional budget cuts had shut down DARPA the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency before it developed the early Internet ?
Today , we face a choice between the future and the past .
The Republicans running for president seem totally unconcerned about the problem of quarterly capitalism .
In fact , their policies would make it worse . Most would eliminate capital gains taxes for wealthy investors with no incentives for long-term holding .
They 'd wipe out the new rules on Wall Street imposed after the crisis .
And , of course , they 'd further strip worker rights and weaken bargaining power .
Indeed , their approach to government mirrors the worst tendencies of hit and run shareholders , demanding quick payouts in the form of tax breaks for the wealthy at the expense of investing in the future .
They ignore long-term challenges like climate change , poverty and inequality , failing infrastructure .
Just look at the current mess in Congress with the highway bill .
We can't afford to return to the same out-of-touch , out-of-date policies that wrecked our economy before .
We have to work together to drive strong growth , fair growth , and long-term growth .
That 's the only way we will renew the basic bargain of America .
You know it : if you work hard , you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead .
And when you do , America gets ahead too . It 's the only way we 're going to build an American economy for tomorrow , not yesterday .
I invite you to join me in this discussion . I 'm looking for new creative , innovative , disruptive ideas that will save capitalism for the 21st century because it is the greatest engine of economic opportunity and potential that has ever been invented .
It 's one of the great accomplishments of the American political and economic history .
It created the opportunities that so many generations of Americans took advantage of and that led to the middle class the extraordinary economic accomplishment of our country .
And as we 've had to do in previous eras , it needs to be reinvented .
It needs to be put back into balance . It needs to recognize that we really are all in this together and the better we all do , the more there will be for everybody : to share in , to invest in , to profit from .
So I ask you , and particularly here at Stern the students and the faculty and others who are studying business help us think through the best ways to change the culture , to move it back to where it used to be , which was much more focused on long-term investing , with the results of the extraordinary prosperity that we enjoyed for decades .
We have new challenges from technology and globalization and other big problems on the horizon like climate change , for example but that is what we are best at doing in this country .
We are problem solvers , not problem deniers . We roll up our sleeves , we get to work , and we keep moving forward .
It is always all about tomorrow . Love that song ,
Don't stop thinking about tomorrow . So help me think about it and let 's make it happen .
Thank you all very much . Thank you . Thank you all so much .
Thank you . Thank you all very much . Wow .
Thank you . I really am just delighted to be here in Charleston with all of you and to be introduced by two leaders .
I don't need to tell you what a great mayor Joe Riley has been for Charleston , but I do want to tell you that across America , he is viewed as one of the greatest mayors ever in our country , often called America 's mayor .
And as he leaves office , I think we all understand what a difference he 's made and what he will continue to do , because he has a project of passion the International African American Museum , to be built right here in Charleston .
And I have no doubt that it will be yet another extraordinary accomplishment in Joe Riley 's long and distinguished life and career .
And I also want to thank Ken Riley , the president of ILA Local 1422 .
I think that what Ken was telling me before we came on bears repeating : He was born and raised right here in Charleston , lives on the same block , and is committed to his members and to this community .
And I think we need more leaders everywhere in our country who have that same level of caring and concern to build the economy so that it provides good , middle-class jobs for hardworking people like the ILA does .
And what better evidence could you have than having heard from Georgette , who talked about what having a job with decent pay and decent benefits meant to her personally .
I just thank her so much for coming up and telling her story , because it should remind all of us that the most important way that we can help each other pursue our own dreams and futures is to get the economy producing good-paying jobs with good benefits that are fair and just to those people who are working for a living .
I 've got to tell you , I have a lot of love for South Carolina .
I 've come here numerous times over the past , made some good friends , seen some beautiful sights .
My first job out of law school was working for the Children 's Defense Fund , as Mayor Riley was saying , started and run by a phenomenal South Carolinian Marian Wright Edelman from Bennettsville .
And what she understood is that we needed an advocacy group that would help every kid get ahead , not just kids who already have all the benefits of privilege , but every kid .
She knew that from her own upbringing , and how important it was for her parents to make sure that she and her siblings were well educated and well cared for .
And she 's a friend and she 's a mentor , but the first place she sent me after I took the job was right here in South Carolina .
And at that time , we were looking at the problems posed by putting juveniles into adult jails , and what that would mean to those kids and to their lives and to their potential for overcoming whatever their problems were .
And that experience has stayed with me until today , and it 's one of the reasons why I 'm a staunch advocate for reforming our criminal justice system and ending the era of mass incarceration .
Last night I had the great privilege of speaking at the NAACP Freedom Fund Dinner , the 98th year that the NAACP has been right here in Charleston .
And I was so moved by the tribute that was made to the survivors of the terrible massacre at Mother Emanuel , and to the victims , as family members came forward and put a lighted candle on the table in the middle of the great banquet hall .
I want to thank the people of Charleston for showing such grace and resilience in the face of such hatred , and I appreciate the way this community came together and spoke out about what the real values of us living together should be .
That was a very special spirit , and I think it took America by the hand and helped many people across our country walk through the grief and bewilderment of what happened here .
I think that we need to remember how we felt in the aftermath of that tragedy every day during the year , not just for the weeks immediately afterward .
Because one of the challenges that we need to confront is how we look at each other with respect , how we show empathy for the struggles that one another has , and how we build once again a country that truly does hold out the promise of the American Dream to everybody .
I 'm here at this union headquarters because I believe strongly that the American labor movement , starting at the turn of the last century 19th to 20th century , and moving through the 20th century helped to build the middle class ; it helped to provide the economic engine that raised incomes and raised hopes and lifted people out of poverty and gave them a chance to have a better life for themselves and their families .
And I want to pay tribute to that . I know that it 's tough times in lots of places for us to remember that it was unions that brought fair working conditions , better wages , that created what is an American and important human accomplishment , namely bargaining , having power in your workplace , to stand up for yourselves and your fellow workers .
And this union and others like it have made America a stronger , more prosperous , and more just and equitable country .
I 'm grateful for that , but I also see what 's happening as there is a concerted effort to undermine and eliminate the good work that unions have done .
The defining economic challenge of our time is to raise incomes for working people , get them get them to reflect the hard work that people put in .
Now , you know we had the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression with the so-called Great Recession .
A lot of people forget how bad it was . I mean , we were losing 800,000 jobs a month ; 9 million Americans lost their jobs ; 5 million lost their homes ; and $13 trillion in family wealth was wiped out .
I saw President-elect Obama shortly after the ' 08 election , when he called and asked me to come to Chicago to meet with him .
I didn't know why at the time ; he wanted to ask me to be secretary of state .
But before we got into all that , it was just he and I and he said ,
You know , it 's so much worse than they told us .
The economy was really under stress . We could have had a great depression , and it wasn't easy to dig out of the big hole that the President inherited from his predecessor .
And it 's it 's important for people to remember that .
I don't care what political party you are . I want you to remember what President Obama faced when he came into office , the very first day , and how hard he had to work and how hard the American people had to work to dig us out of that big ditch we were in .
So we 're standing now , but we 're not yet running .
We 've recovered 13 million jobs , but wages have not recovered .
The average worker in America is still behind because the price of everything else has gone up .
And there are a lot of things we have to do to build on the progress that President Obama made , and I intend to do that .
And in the list of policies that I will promote as your president stands a strong commitment to supporting unions and the right to organize .
And I will support collective bargaining . Now , it 's not just because I respect the work you do .
It 's because if you go back to the founding of our country , one of the brilliant insights that our founders had is that you 've got to balance power .
If you 're going to keep a democracy , and if you 're going to have a country as diverse and big as ours , grow together .
So that 's why we have a balance of power , a separation of power in our government .
We have three branches . We have two main political parties .
Now , sometimes it can be frustrating but over the course of our history , it has worked out pretty well for us .
But they also recognized and successive leaders of our country recognized that we need the same balance of power in our economy , and that 's one of the reasons why unions have to be at the table .
That 's one of the reasons that I stand with the workers over at Boeing , who are being asked to stand up for themselves .
They are fighting for the right to organize free from intimidation and harassment , because those rights are central to building the middle class .
And we need to stand up to attacks on workers ' rights .
Now , I know that here in this state , there is a big effort , led from the top but going throughout your government , to dismantle collective bargaining rights .
You hear it all the time : South Carolina doesn't need unions .
I 've got to tell you , you still have a lot of really poor people in South Carolina who need good jobs with rising wages and safe working conditions .
And yes , I know South Carolina is a so-called righ t-t o-work state , but you still should have the right to have somebody looking out for your best interests when it comes to your job .
I also have on that list that we 're going to raise that minimum wage because it is a poverty wage that keeps people behind and down .
And that is important to me for many reasons . I don't think anybody in America who works full-time should still be living in poverty or trying to raise their kids in poverty .
And two-thirds two-thirds of all minimum wage workers are women .
A lot of them , supporting themselves or single parents supporting their kids .
And we 've got to raise the federal minimum wage , because that should provide the benchmark by which states have to be measured .
And we have to do away with something called the tipped wage .
You ever hear of that ? This is a provision in the minimum wage law that permits businesses to pay workers , mostly waitresses , bartenders , women working in hair salons they can pay them as low as $2.13 an hour .
Because the theory is they 're going to make it up in tips .
Every study has shown that it 's only in rare cases that that actually happens .
Because what often happens is that the money gets diverted ; it doesn't end up in the worker 's pocket , even though that 's what it was intended for .
And so we have to do away with that . Everybody should have a decent wage if they are willing to work for a living .
And I tell you , I am going to finally make sure that women get equal work for equal pay .
Now , you would think that I wouldn't have to stand up here in 2015 and say that , and that I wouldn't provoke such a response from women and men in the audience .
But the truth is you know it . We still don't have it .
Now , if you 're a member of a union , and you 've got set hourly wages or incomes that are key to the job you do , you get it .
If you work for the government I had a little girl at a town hall in Nevada that I called on say to me ,
Well , if you were the girl president , will you get paid the same as the boy president ?
I had to stop and think about it for a minute , but I believe the answer is yes .
I met a young man in New Hampshire who said to me , I want to tell you why I 'm supporting you , and I said , Please , and he said , I 'll tell you .
He said , My first real job was when he was 17 .
He got a job as a cashier at a store where his mother had worked for four years as a cashier , and they knew the family and they gave this young man his first , as he said , real job .
He was pretty excited . First pay period , he brings home his check and he 's showing his mother , and all of a sudden he sees this look on his mother 's face , and he goes ,
Mom , what 's wrong ? She said ,
Well , I 'll tell you what 's wrong . You 're making a dollar more an hour having just started than I 'm making having worked four years .
So I think some people like to pretend that this is a problem behind us , that we 've solved it .
It isn't . And this is not just a women 's issue ; this is an economic issue , it 's a family support issue , it 's a fairness issue .
And so when sometimes the Republicans accuse me of playing the gender card , I say , if standing up for equal pay for equal work is playing the gender card , deal me in because I am ( inaudible ) all the way .
The bottom line is the facts speak for themselves . The economy does better when we have a Democrat in the White House .
And just look at our last two Democratic presidents . I know both of them .
America creates more jobs , unemployment is lower , deficits are smaller , and although my Republican friends hate it when I say this , recessions happen four times more likely when you have a Republican in the White House .
So I am focused on the economy . I am not running for my husband 's third term or for Barack Obama 's third term ; I 'm running for my first term , but I 'm going to do what works to raise wages and ( inaudible ) .
While we 're at it , let 's turn South Carolina blue .
What do you think ? Oh , all in good time .
All in good time . Now , there 's a lot more we have to do , and let me just quickly mention a few things .
We 've got to make sure education works for everybody , and I think that starts that starts with listening to teachers who are actually in the classrooms getting to know the children .
It starts with better preparing kids so that when they get to school they can be successful .
That 's why I am very much in favor of quality , early childhood education .
And then , we have got to make college affordable again for middle-class and working families ( inaudible ) .
This is so important to me . How many of you ever had student debt ?
OK . I did . I had student debt . It was a long time ago , but it didn't break the bank for me .
So what I want to do is make college more affordable , make it so if you go to a public college or university , you will not have to borrow a dime to pay tuition .
And I agree with President Obama community college should be free because it is the continuation of education after high school .
And I want to make sure we have special funding set aside for single parents who start school and have a really hard time staying in and finishing .
And for historically black colleges and universities that still turn out more black professionals than other colleges .
And I 'm going to make sure you can refinance your college debt .
You can refinance your mortgage , your car payment ; you ought to be able to refinance your college debt .
And you 'd end up saving thousands of dollars . And I don't think our government should be making a profit on the money that young people and their families borrow to go to college .
I don't think that is right . Now , I also want to make sure that we defend the Affordable Care Act .
It has made it possible for 18 million Americans to get health care .
And I want to fix some of the problems that it has .
We 've got to preserve the foundation and defend it .
The Republicans have voted 60 times to repeal it . They never tell you what they would put in its place , do they ?
They just say , Repeal it , and it 'll be so much better .
Well , here 's what I want to do . I want to get the cost of out-of-pocket expenses down .
I want insurance companies to have to absorb the cost of three sick office visits so that you don't use up your deductible .
I want to make sure we get the cost of prescription drugs down because that is the biggest driver of increasing health care costs .
And when I advocate that , the drug companies go ,
Oh , my gosh , oh , my gosh , that 's going to really hurt us .
It 's going to make it impossible for us to be able to do the research .
Well , I want you to look at the fine print , folks .
The drug companies spend more money on advertising than they do on research .
I actually think I 'm going to be doing them a favor by removing the tax expense advantage they get for advertising so they can put more money into research and bring important drugs to market sooner .
And I am going to do everything I can to reverse the reality today , which is that the American taxpayer pays the highest price for drugs than anybody in the world .
Why ? Because our tax dollars go to support the National Institutes of Health .
I want to do more there , not less , because that 's where a lot of our discoveries come out of .
Our tax dollars support the Federal Drug that 's great because they do the testing to determine whether the drugs are safe or not .
And then , the drug companies negotiate for lower prices with everybody else in the world except us .
So then we end up paying the highest prices in the world for the drugs we helped to support to be developed .
Now , as a senator from New York , if you look at the map , there 's a big swath of New York that borders Canada .
And I had a lot of constituents who every week would cross the border to buy the very same drugs they needed at much less of a cost , because Canada negotiated for lower prices .
But because of the strength of the drug companies , Congress has never bucked them .
Well , we 're going to make this a political voting issue .
You 're going to with the patients and the consumers and the taxpayers of America , or you 're going to be with the drug companies .
We 're going to get those costs down . So there 's a lot we have to do together , and we have to defend our basic rights : women 's rights , gay rights , voting rights , human rights .
We have to defend them because if you go listen to the Republican debates , they 're after everybody .
you 've got to give them this : They 're equal opportunity insulters .
Well , I think we have to defend women 's rights , particularly a woman 's right to choose .
We have to defend we have to defend gay rights , because even though you can get married now in so much of our country , you can get married on Saturday and fired on Monday .
We 've got to have anti-discrimination laws so that people can live their lives .
And we 've got to protect voting rights . Think of what the civil rights generation did .
Think of the costs and sacrifice they made . I was with Congressman John Lewis yesterday in Atlanta .
He bled he bled in the march in Selma to make sure people could register to vote .
And now so many states are trying to pull back that right , that most fundamental right .
I was in Alabama the other day , and they passed one of these really strict voter ID laws .
And the said , well , one of the IDs you could use was your driver 's license .
Okay . I think a lot of these laws are way overdone , but okay , driver 's license .
And then the governor announces they 're closing the motor vehicle offices in the counties with the biggest black population .
And when questioned about it , they said , Oh , it 's just a budget thing .
And I told this big group of Alabama Democrats that I 'd spent a lot of wonderful years in Arkansas and I learned a lot , and I learned one of my favorite sayings , which is if you find a turtle on a fencepost , it didn't get there by accident .
And think about it . So we 've got to stand up for the most fundamental of our rights , and we 've got to do everything we can , including if it takes a constitutional amendment , to reverse
Citizens United , which is a corrupting , pernicious influence on our elections .
And I also support comprehensive immigration reform . I 'm going to keep working for that .
I am also adamant that we need to fix the problems in our VA system , but don't let the Republicans try to privatize it and rip away the good parts of VA . Just like we have to defend Social Security and Medicare from their schemes to privatize it and end it as we know it .
We 're not going to let that happen . And I am also advocating for commonsense gun safety measures .
I think the path here is clear . I know it 's difficult , but a majority of Americans and a majority of gun owners the majority of gun owners know this needs to be done .
We need universal background checks . We need to close the gun show loophole .
We need to have checks online so that people who can't buy a gun in person can't buy it online .
And we need to close what 's being called the Charleston loophole .
You know what that is ? Under the law we have , the Brady law , you can get your gun within three business days , whether or not the check on you has been finished .
Now , as complicated as our country is and as complicated as our technology is , sometimes it 's not possible to find that information .
Well , that disturbed young man who went and bought the gun that he used to kill those nine worshipers at Mother Emanuel church was not entitled to buy a gun , but they found that out right after he committed those murders .
We 've got to close that . I mean , why are you in such a hurry to buy not a hunting rifle , but a killing machine .
And we also have to reverse the shield , the immunity shield that gun makers and sellers were given by the Congress , that removes any accountability .
It 's the only industry in America that is immune from any kind of accountability .
So I 'm going to take this issue on . I 'm going to try to do what I can to make it an issue that people really understand .
And I 'm looking for a lot of support from responsible gun owners .
Because right now we 've got 90 people dying a day from homicides , suicides , and accidents .
Somehow a lot of people with guns have forgotten or never knew basic safety measures .
My dad taught me to shoot taught me to shoot behind our little vacation home up in the Poconos in Pennsylvania .
I 've been hunting . But my father would no more have allowed a loaded gun to be left lying around in our house than he would have jumped off the Empire State Building .
And yet we have toddlers toddlers picking up loaded guns across America , killing each other , wounding a parent or a grandparent .
There 's something deeply wrong when there has been such an abandonment of common sense .
So we 've got to protect our kids and our communities going forward .
Now , I am thrilled to be here and I need your help , and I know that we 've got a primary coming up which will be very important .
And I hope each and every one of you will get involved in my campaign .
If there are questions you have , please go to hillaryclinton.com and read what I am proposing in a wealth of areas that I think are important .
And then volunteer some time . Be part of this because I want to run on an agenda that will actually tell voters what I will do when I get in office .
I want you to know that . Because as Joe Riley and I were just talking about , as hard as a campaign is , the hard work starts when you 've been elected .
I want to be ready the day after that election , when we do , Joe , finally shatter that high and hard glass ceiling .
So that I can go to work for you , I can fight for you , and together we will make sure America 's best days are ahead of us .
Thank you very much . God bless you . The strategy Hillary outlined hinges on three main elements defeating ISIS in Syria , Iraq , and across the Middle East ; disrupting and dismantling the growing terrorist infrastructure that facilitates the flow of fighters , financing , arms , and propaganda around the world ; and hardening our defenses and those of our allies against external and homegrown threats .
Thank you to Richard and thanks for the great work that the council does under your leadership .
It truly is an important resource for us all . Fareed , I look forward to having the conversation with you , everyone here at the Council , and Mr. Mayor , thank you very much for being here and for everything you are doing and will do to keep our city safe and strong .
I am very grateful . I wanted to come here , to our city , which has shown such resilience in the face of terrorism , to talk about the events of the past week and the work we must do together to protect our country and our friends .
When the United States was hit on 9/11 , our allies treated that attack against one as an attack against all .
Now it is our turn to stand in solidarity with France and all of our friends .
We cherish the same values , we face the same adversaries , we must share the same determination .
After a major terrorist attack , every society faces a choice between fear and resolve .
The world 's great democracies can't sacrifice our values or turn our backs on those in need .
Therefore , we must choose resolve . And we must lead the world to meet this threat .
Now , let us be clear about what we are facing .
Beyond Paris , in recent days , we have seen deadly terrorist attacks in Nigeria , Lebanon , Iraq , and Turkey .
And a Russian civilian airliner destroyed over the Sinai . At the heart of today 's new landscape of terror is ISIS .
They persecute religious and ethnic minorities , kidnap and behead civilians , murder children .
They systematically enslave , torture , and rape women and girls .
ISIS operates across three mutually reinforcing dimensions : a physical enclave in Iraq and Syria , an international terrorist network that includes affiliates across the region and beyond , and an ideological movement of radical jihadism .
We have to target and defeat all three . And time is of the essence .
ISIS is demonstrating new ambition , reach , and capabilities .
We have to break the group 's momentum and then its back .
Our goal is not to deter or contain ISIS , but to defeat and destroy ISIS .
But we have learned that we can score victories over terrorist leaders and networks only to face metastasizing threats down the road .
So we also have to play and win the long game .
We should pursue a comprehensive counterterrorism strategy one that embeds our mission against ISIS within a broader struggle against radical jihadism that is bigger than any one group , whether it 's al Qaeda or ISIS or some other network .
An immediate war against an urgent enemy and a generational struggle against an ideology with deep roots will not be easily be torn out .
It will require sustained commitment and every pillar of American power .
This is a worldwide fight and America must lead it .
Our strategy should have three main elements . One , defeat ISIS in Syria , Iraq , and across the Middle East .
Two , disrupt and dismantle the growing terrorist infrastructure that facilitates the flow of fighters , financing , arms , and propaganda around the world .
Three , harden our defenses and those of our allies against external and homegrown threats .
Let me start with the campaign to defeat ISIS across the region .
The United States and our international coalition have been conducting this fight for more than a year .
It is time to begin a new phase and intensify and broaden our efforts to smash the would-be caliphate and deny ISIS control of territory in Iraq and Syria .
That starts with a more effective coalition air campaign , with more allied planes , more strikes , and a broader target set .
A key obstacle standing in the way is a shortage of good intelligence about ISIS and its operations .
So we need an immediate intelligence surge in the region , including technical assets , Arabic speakers with deep expertise in the Middle East , and even closer partnership with regional intelligence services .
Our goal should be to achieve the kind of penetration we accomplished with al Qaeda in the past .
This would help us identify and eliminate ISIS 's command and control and its economic lifelines .
A more effective coalition air campaign is necessary , but not sufficient .
And we should be honest about the fact that , to be successful , air strikes will have to be combined with ground forces actually taking back more territory from ISIS .
Like President Obama , I do not believe that we should again have a hundred thousand American troops in combat in the Middle East .
That is just not the smart move to make here .
If we have learned anything from 15 years of war in Iraq and Afghanistan , it is that local people and nations have to secure their own communities .
We can help them and we should , but we cannot substitute for them .
But we can and should support local and regional ground forces in carrying out this mission .
Now , the obstacles to achieving this are significant . On the Iraqi side of the border , Kurdish forces have fought bravely to defend their own lands and to retake towns from ISIS .
But the Iraqi national army has struggled . It is going to take more work to get it up to fighting shape .
As part of that process , we may have to give our own troops advising and training the Iraqis greater freedom of movement and flexibility , including embedding in local units and helping target airstrikes .
Ultimately , however , the ground campaign in Iraq will only succeed if more Iraqi Sunnis join the fight .
But that will not happen so long as they do not feel they have a stake in their country or confidence in their own security and capacity to confront ISIS .
Now , we have been in a similar place before in Iraq .
In the first Sunni Awakening in 2007 , we were able to provide sufficient support and assurances to the Sunni tribes to persuade them to join us in rooting out Al Qaeda .
Unfortunately , under Prime Minister Maliki 's rule , those tribes were betrayed and forgotten .
So the task of bringing Sunnis off the sidelines into this new fight will be considerably more difficult .
But nonetheless we need to lay the foundation for a second Sunni Awakening .
We need to put sustained pressure on the government in Baghdad to get its political house in order , move forward with national reconciliation , and finally stand up a National Guard .
Baghdad needs to accept even embrace arming Sunni and Kurdish forces in the war against ISIS .
But if Baghdad will not do that , the coalition should do so , directly .
On the Syrian side , the big obstacle to getting more ground forces to engage ISIS beyond the Syrian Kurds who are already deep in the fight is that the viable Sunni opposition groups remain understandably preoccupied with fighting Assad , who let us remember has killed many more Syrians than the terrorists have .
But they are increasingly seeing the threat from ISIS as well .
So we need to move simultaneously toward a political solution to the civil war that paves the way for a new government with new leadership , and to encourage more Syrians to take on ISIS as well .
To support them , we should immediately deploy the Special Operations force President Obama has already authorized and be prepared to deploy more , as more Syrians get into the fight .
And we should retool and ramp up our efforts to support and equip viable Syrian opposition units .
Our increased support should go hand-in-hand with increased support from our Arab and European partners , including special forces who can contribute to the fight on the ground .
We should also work with the coalition and the neighbors to impose no fly zones that will stop Assad from slaughtering civilians and the opposition from the air .
Opposition forces on the ground , with material support from the coalition , could then help create safe areas where Syrians could remain in the country rather than fleeing toward Europe .
This combined approach would help enable the opposition to retake the remaining stretch of the Turkish border from ISIS , choking off its supply lines .
It would also give us new leverage in the diplomatic process that Secretary Kerry is pursuing .
Of course , we have been down plenty of diplomatic dead-ends before in this conflict .
But we have models for how seemingly intractable , multi-sectarian civil wars do eventually end .
We can learn lessons from Lebanon and Bosnia about what it will take .
And Russia and Iran have to face the fact that continuing to prop up a vicious dictator will not bring stability .
Right now , I am afraid President Putin is actually making things somewhat worse .
Now to be clear though , there is a role for Russia to help for resolving the conflict in Syria .
And we have indicated a willingness to work with them toward an outcome that preserves Syria as a unitary , non-sectarian state , with protections of the rights of all Syrians and to keep key state institutions in tact .
There is no alternative to a political transition that allows Syrians to end Assad 's rule .
Now , much of this strategy on both sides of the border hinges on the roles of our Arab and Turkish partners .
And we must get them to carry their share of the burden , with military , intelligence , and financial contributions , as well as using their influence with fighters and tribes in Iraq and Syria .
Countries like Jordan have offered more , and we should take them up on it .
Because ultimately , our efforts will only succeed if the Arabs and Turks step up in a much bigger way .
This is their fight and they need to act like it .
So far , however , Turkey has been more focused on the Kurds than on countering ISIS . And to be fair , Turkey has a long and painful history with Kurdish terrorist groups .
But the threat from ISIS cannot wait . As difficult as it may be , we need to get Turkey to stop bombing Kurdish fighters in Syria who are battling ISIS and become a full partner our coalition efforts against ISIS .
The United States should also work with our Arab partners to get them more invested in the fight against ISIS .
At the moment , they are focused in other areas , because of their concerns in the region , especially the threat from Iran .
That is why the Saudis , for example , shifted attention from Syria to Yemen .
So we have to work out a common approach . In September , I laid out a comprehensive plan to counter Iranian influence across the region and its support for terrorist proxies such as Hezbollah and Hamas .
We cannot view Iran and ISIS as separate challenges . Regional politics are too interwoven .
Raising the confidence of our Arab partners and raising the costs to Iran for bad behavior will contribute to a more effective fight against ISIS .
And as we work out a broader regional approach , we should of course be closely consulting with Israel , our strongest ally in the Middle East .
Israel increasingly shares with our Arab partners and has the opportunity to do more in intelligence and in joint efforts as well .
We should have no illusions about how difficult the mission before us really is .
We have to fit a lot of pieces together , bring a lot of partners along , move on multiple fronts at once .
But if we press forward on both sides of the border , in the air and on the ground , as well as diplomatically , I do believe we can crush ISIS 's enclave of terror .
And to support this campaign , Congress should swiftly pass an updated authorization to use military force .
That will send a message to friend and foe alike that the United States is committed to this fight .
The time for delay is over . We should get this done .
Now , the second element of our strategy looks beyond the immediate battlefield of Iraq and Syria to disrupt and dismantle global terrorist infrastructure on the ground and online .
A terror pipeline that facilitates the flow of fighters , financing , arms , and propaganda around the world , has allowed ISIS to strike at the heart of Paris last week , and allowed al Qaeda affiliate to do the same at Charlie Hebdo earlier this year .
ISIS is working hard to extend its reach , establishing affiliates and cells far from its home base .
And despite significant setbacks it has encountered , not just with ISIS and its ambitious plans but even al Queda , including the death of Osama bin Laden .
They are still posing rape threats to so many . Let 's take one example .
We have had a lot of conversation about ISIS in the last week .
Let 's not forget about al Queda . They still have the most sophisticated bomb-makers , ambitious plotters , and active affiliates in places like Yemen and North Africa .
So we can't just focus on Iraq and Syria we need to intensify our counterterrorism efforts across a wider scope .
Most urgent is stopping the flow of foreign fighters to and from the war zones of the Middle East .
Thousands , thousands , of young recruits have flocked to Syria from France , Germany , Belgium , the United Kingdom , and yes , even the United States .
Their western passports make it easier for them to cross borders and eventually return home , radicalized and battle-hardened .
Stemming this tide will require much better coordination and information sharing among countries every step of the way .
We should not stop pressing until Turkey , where most foreign fighters cross into Syria , finally locks down its border .
The United States and our allies need to know and share the identities of every fighter who has traveled to Syria .
We also have to be smart and target interventions that will have the greatest impact .
For example , we need a greater focus on shutting down key enablers who arrange transportation , documents , and more .
When it comes to terrorist financing , we have to go after the nodes that facilitate illicit trade and transactions .
The U.N. Security Council should update its terrorism sanctions . They have a resolution that does try to block terrorist financing and other enabling activities but we have to place more obligation on countries to police their own banks .
And the United States , which has quite a record of success in this area , can share more intelligence to help other countries .
And , once and for all , the Saudis , the Qataris , and others need to stop their citizens from directly funding extremist organizations , as well as schools and mosques around the world that have set too many young people on a path toward radicalization .
When it comes to blocking terrorist recruitment , we have to identify the hotspots the specific neighborhoods and villages , the prisons and schools where recruitment happens in clusters .
Like the neighborhood in Brussels where the Paris attacks were planned .
Through partnerships with local law enforcement and civil society especially Muslim community leaders we have to work to tip the balance away from extremism in these hotspots .
Radicalization and recruitment also is happening online . And there is no doubt we have to do a better job contesting online space , including websites and chat rooms where jihadists communicate with followers .
We must deny them virtual territory , just as we deny them actual territory .
At the State Department , I built up a unit of communications specialists fluent in Urdu , Arabic , Somali , and other languages to do battle with extremists online .
We need more of that , including from the private sector .
Social media companies can also do their part by swiftly shutting down terrorist accounts so they are not used to plan , provoke , or celebrate violence .
Online or offline , the bottom line is that we are in a contest of ideas against an ideology of hate and we have to win it .
Now , let 's be clear though : Islam itself is not our adversary .
Muslims are peaceful and tolerant people and have nothing whatsoever to do with terrorism .
The obsession in some quarters with a clash of civilizations or repeating the specific words
radical Islamic terrorism is not just a distraction , it gives these criminals , these murderers , more standing than they deserve and it actually plays into their hands by alienating partners we need by our side .
Our priority should be how to fight the enemy . In the end , it didn't matter what kind of terrorist we called Bin Laden , it mattered that we killed Bin Laden .
But we still can't close our eyes to the fact that there is a distorted and dangerous strain of extremism within the Muslim world that continues to spread .
Its adherents are relatively few in number , but capable of causing profound damage most especially to their own communities throughout an arc of instability that stretches from North and West Africa to Asia .
Overlapping conflicts , collapsing state structures , widespread corruption , poverty , and repression have created openings for extremists to exploit .
Before the Arab Spring , I warned that the region 's foundations would sink into the sand without immediate reforms .
Well , the need has only grown more urgent . We have to join with our partners to do the patient , steady work of empowering moderates and marginalizing extremists : supporting democratic institutions and the rule of law , creating economic growth that supports stability , working to curb corruption , helping train effective and accountable local intelligence , law enforcement , and counterterrorism services .
As we do this , we must be building up a global counterterrorism infrastructure that is more effective and adaptable than the terror networks we 're trying to defeat .
When I became secretary of state , I was surprised to find that nearly a decade after 9/11 , there was still no dedicated international vehicle to regularly convene key countries to deal with terrorist threats .
So we created the Global Counterterrorism Forum , which now brings together nearly 30 countries , many from the Muslim world .
It should be a clearinghouse for directing assistance to countries that need it , for mobilizing common action against threats .
And let 's not lose sight of the global cooperation needed to lock down loose nuclear material , and chemical and biological weapons and keep them out of the hands of terrorists .
At the end of the day , we still must be prepared to go after terrorists wherever they plot , using all the tools at our disposal .
That includes targeted strikes by U.S. military aircraft and drones , with proper safeguards , when there aren't any other viable options to deal with continuing imminent threats .
All of this stopping foreign fighters , blocking terrorist financing , doing battle in cyberspace is vital to the war against ISIS , but it is also lays the foundation for defusing and defeating the next threat and the one after that .
Now the third element of our strategy has to be hardening our defenses at home and helping our partners do the same against both external and homegrown threats .
After 9/11 , the United States made a lot of progress breaking down bureaucratic barriers to allow for more and better information sharing among agencies responsible for keeping us safe .
We still have work to do on this front , but by comparison , Europe is way behind .
Today , European nations do not even always alert each other when they turn away a suspected jihadist at the border or when a passport is stolen .
It seems like after most terrorist attacks , we find out that the perpetrators were known to some security service or another , but too often the dots never get connected .
I appreciate how hard this is , especially given the sheer number of suspects and threats , but this has to change .
The United States must work with Europe to dramatically and immediately improve intelligence sharing and counterterrorism coordination .
European countries also should have the flexibility to enhance their border controls when circumstances warrant .
And here at home , we face a number of our own challenges .
The threat to airline security is evolving as terrorists develop new devices like non-metallic bombs , so our defenses have to stay , at least , one step ahead .
We know that intelligence gathered and shared by local law enforcement officers is absolutely critical to breaking up plots and preventing attacks .
So they need all the resources and support we can give them .
Law enforcement also needs the trust of residents and communities , including in our own country Muslim-Americans .
This should go without saying , but in the current climate it bears repeating : Muslim Americans are working every day on the front lines of the fight against radicalization .
Another challenge is how to strike the right balance of protecting privacy and security .
Encryption of mobile communications presents a particularly tough problem . We should take the concerns of law enforcement and counterterrorism professionals seriously .
They have warned that impenetrable encryption may prevent them from accessing terrorist communications and preventing a future attack .
On the other hand we know there are legitimate concerns about government intrusion , network security , and creating new vulnerabilities that bad actors can and would exploit .
So we need Silicon Valley not to view government as its adversary .
We need to challenge our best minds in the private sector to work with our best minds in the public sector .
To develop solutions that will both keep us safe and protect our privacy .
Now is the time to solve this problem , not after the next attack .
Since Paris , no homeland security challenge is being more hotly debated than how to handle Syrian refugees seeking safety in the United States .
Our highest priority , of course , must always be protecting the American people .
So yes , we do need to be vigilant in screening and vetting any refugees from Syria , guided by the best judgment of our security professionals in close coordination with our allies and partners .
And Congress needs to make sure the necessary resources are provided for comprehensive background checks , drawing on the best intelligence we can get .
And we should be taking a close look at the safeguards in visa programs as well .
But we cannot allow terrorists to intimidate us into abandoning our values and humanitarian obligations .
Turning away orphans , applying a religious test , discriminating against Muslims , slamming the door on every single Syrian refugee that is just not who we are .
We are better than that . And remember , many of these refugees are fleeing the same terrorists who threaten us .
It would be a cruel irony indeed if ISIS can force families from their homes and then also prevent them from ever finding new ones .
We should be doing more to ease this humanitarian crisis , not less .
We should lead the international community in organizing a donor conference and supporting countries like Jordan who are sheltering the majority of refugees fleeing Syria .
And we can get this right . America 's open , free , tolerant society is described by some as a vulnerability in the struggle against terrorism .
But I actually believe it is one of our greatest strengths .
It reduces the appeal of radicalism and enhances the richness and resilience of our communities .
This is not a time for scoring political points . When New York was attacked on 9/11 , we had a Republican president , a Republican governor , and a Republican mayor , and I worked with all of them .
We pulled together and put partisanship aside to rebuild our city and protect our country This is a time for American leadership .
No other country can rally the world to defeat ISIS and win the generational struggle against radical jihadism .
Only the United States can mobilize common action on a global scale .
And that is exactly what we need . The entire world must be part of this fight , but we must lead it .
There 's been a lot of talk lately about coalitions .
Everyone seems to want one . But there is not nearly as much talk about what it actually takes to make a coalition work in the heat and pressure of an international crisis .
I know how hard this is because we have done it before to impose the toughest sanctions in history on Iran .
To stop a dictator from slaughtering his people in Libya .
To support a fledgling democracy in Afghanistan . We have to use every pillar of American power military might but also diplomacy , development aid , economic and cultural influence , technology , and the force of our values , that is smart power .
You have to work with institutions and partners , like NATO , the E.U. , the Arab League , and the U.N. Strengthen alliances and never get tired of old-fashioned shoe-leather diplomacy .
And , if necessary , be prepared to act decisively on our own , just as we did to bring Osama bin Laden to justice .
The United States and our allies must demonstrate that free people and free markets are still the hope of humanity .
This past week , as I watched the tragic scenes from France , I kept thinking back to a young man the world met in January , after the last attack in Paris .
His name was Lassana , a Muslim immigrant from Mali who worked at a kosher market .
He said the market had become a new home and his colleagues and customers , a second family .
When the terrorist arrived and the gunfire began , Lassana risked his life to protect his Jewish customers .
He moved quickly , hiding as many people as he could in the cold storage room and then slipping out to help the police .
I didn't know or care , he said , if they were Jews or Christians or Muslims .
We are all in the same boat . What a rebuke to the extremists ' hatred .
The French government announced it would grant Lassana full citizenship .
But when it mattered most , he proved he was a citizen already .
That is the power of free people . That is what the jihadis will never understand and never defeat .
And as we meet here today , let us resolve that we will go forward together and we will do all we can to lead the world against this threat , that threatens people everywhere .
Thank you all . At a grassroots organizing meeting in Memphis , Hillary Clinton pledged to fight for tax relief for middle-class families in order to boost their take-home pay and help them deal with rising costs .
In particular , Hillary talked about her new tax credit of up to $ 5,000 to help families with excessive health care costs .
Hillary said she wants to ensure that nobody goes without the health care they need .
This event marked Hillary 's first Tennessee swing ahead of the state 's March 1 primary .
I am thrilled to be back in Memphis here in Lemoyne-Owen .
I very much appreciate the college hosting us . I want to thank Andrea Miller , the president of the college , all of the faculty and students , Bob Simpson , the chair , and all the members of the board of trustees .
It 's a special pleasure for us to be here with you on this campus , thank you so much .
I also want to thank your Congressman . Thank you so much Congressman Cohen for your work and your passionate advocacy on behalf of the people you represent .
I 've got to tell you , I loved coming to Memphis in the past .
You know , I didn't live too far away for a long time just across the river .
Do we have anybody from Arkansas here tonight ? My husband and I appreciated the hospitality and the friendship of folks from Memphis , and it 's always good to be back , and especially to be here with you as we begin working toward the primary here in Tennessee .
You know , I don't think there could be more at stake in an election than this one we 've got coming up .
Here at home , we have got to do a better job in raising incomes and providing opportunity for all of our people .
And around the world , we have to show leadership to keep our country and our friends and allies safe and secure .
I know how hard this job is , I 've seen it up close and personal .
I was so proud of the job that my husband did when he went from being governor of Arkansas to president of the United States .
And at the end of those eight years , we had 23 million new jobs .
Incomes had risen for everybody the top , the middle , working folks , poor people .
And then along came another Republican president . You know , when you end up handing the next president a balanced budget and a surplus , think of what we could have done with that .
Think of the investments in education and health care and job creation .
But that 's not what happened , is it ? Now , after the 2008 election , then President-elect Obama called me and asked me to come see him in Chicago .
I didn't know what he wanted , turns out he wanted me to be Secretary of State .
But before we talked about that , he said to me ,
It 's so much worse than they told us .
I said , Mr. President-elect , that 's exactly what my husband said to me after that election in 1992 .
Now , I know that my Republican friends don't like me to say this , but the economy does better with a democratic president in the White House .
And I can guarantee you the Republicans don't want us to think about how we ended up in that Great Recession that President Obama inherited , do they ?
Nine million Americans lost their jobs . Five million lost their homes .
Thirteen trillion dollars in family wealth was wiped out . And so in comes a new president facing this crisis , the worst since the Great Depression , and I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for pulling us out of that big ditch .
Now , it is all well and good for the Republicans to criticize , but their record deserves scrutiny .
And they are running on the same economic policies that have failed us before : trickle-down economics , cut taxes on the wealthy , get out of the way of the big corporations .
Well , we know how that story ends , don't we ?
So I 'm running for president to get the economy working for everybody , to raise incomes for everybody .
To make sure the deck is not stacked for those at the top like it is right now , and we have to win an election to make sure that we can do that .
As I look out at this crowd and it 's such an enthusiastic big crowd
But I am convinced that raising incomes for hardworking families is the number one job of our economy .
That 's why I believe you deserve a raise increase , not a tax increase , and I am not going to stand for that .
I will also fight to raise the minimum wage , because nobody who works full time in America should still be living in poverty .
And we are going to create some more good paying jobs , how do we do that ?
Well for one we are going to fix the roads , the bridges , the tunnels , the airports , and the ports .
There is no reason why we shouldn't be creating millions of jobs to make our infrastructure more competitive .
And we 're also going to create more good jobs from clean renewable energy while we fight climate change which is a real problem .
We are going to do more to help small business , because 60 percent of the new jobs in America come from small businesses .
And I 'll tell you , one of the fastest ways we could raise incomes for so many Americans and families is to make sure women get equal pay .
And one of the most important tasks we have is to make sure all of our people , young and not so young , are well prepared for the jobs of the future .
That 's why institutions like this are so important . I have something called the New College Compact , so that you do not have to borrow money to pay tuition when you go to college .
And I want to make sure that we do more for historically black colleges and universities .
We have got to get the cost down , but then we have got to help people repay the debt they already have .
I meet young people across the country who are paying thousands , thousands of dollars that they borrowed .
I see heads nodding right here . Well first , we are going to make it possible for you to refinance your debt , if you can refinance your house or your car , you ought to be able to refinance your college and student debt .
And then , we are going to save you thousands of dollars by making it possible for you to repay it as a percentage of the income you make when you get out of school , and I know that works because Bill and I did that , we both borrowed money when we went to law school and then we paid it back as a percentage so I could go to work for the Children 's Defense Fund not for some big law firm that would pay me more I wanted to do the work I loved
but I had to pay it back . I want everybody to have that chance .
And I want more kids to get off to a good start .
That 's why early childhood education , quality childcare , universal pre-k is so important .
I will also defend the Affordable Care Act . The Republicans have tried to appeal it time and time again , but I want to improve it .
We are going to defend it and we are going to improve it .
How are we going to do that ? Well , out of pocket costs and prescription drug costs are just way too high , aren't they ?
So what I am proposing is a new tax credit of up to $ 5,000 to help families that have excessive health care costs .
You never know when that 's going to happen to you .
Somebody gets sick . Somebody has an accident . You 've got to be prepared , but too many families don't have those resources .
So I think we should all provide that kind of help through a tax credit , so that nobody goes without the health care they need .
And I will also make it very clear that we 're going to go after these high prescription drug costs .
I want you to think about this : Us taxpayers , we pay to support the National Institute of Health , right ?
They partner with universities and drug companies to help develop drugs .
And those drugs can save lives , extend lives . And then , we pay for the Food and Drug Administration to test those drugs to make sure they 're safe enough to be given to people .
So we have an investment , we and our tax dollars .
And then we can charge the highest costs in the world it is just wrong .
It 's wrong , friends . I represented New York , and if you look at the map New York has a long border with Canada .
And every week , people would cross that border to go buy the same drugs cheaper in Canada than they could buy them in New York .
So we 're going to get the authority to , number one , change the drugs companies so they can't deduct the cost of all those advertisements you see on TV , and they actually put that money into research and development to create new drugs and treatments ! And then , number two , we 're going to give Medicare the authority to negotiate lower prices like they get in Canada and elsewhere , we can do this because if people stand up and speak out we can create the political pressure for change .
And so , I 'm going to need you not only in the primary and the general election because I 'll tell you , I 'm going to campaign in Tennessee to try to turn it blue in November of 2016 !
And I 'm going to try to I 'm going to try to convince more governors like your governor here in Tennessee to expand Medicaid so that more people can get their health care needs .
I just came from Kentucky , just across the border , and the democratic governor there , who 's ending his term , expanded Medicaid .
Before he did that , 14 percent of the people in Kentucky did not have health insurance .
Then he expanded it , more people got it and all of a sudden , they were taking care of health problems that they 've ignored for years .
Ninety thousand of them got cholesterol screenings , 46,000 were screened for diabetes , 26,000 got breast exams , more than 13,000 got treatment for substance abuse .
Now that is care that they didn't get before , and if Tennessee would have followed that approach the Volunteer State would have seen 250,000 more people , primarily working folks , get coverage between 2013 and 2014 .
I don't want to rub it in or anything , but Arkansas expanded Medicaid , right ?
Hundreds of thousands of folks just across the river are getting healthcare now who didn't get it before .
Or maybe they got it when they walked into an emergency room , instead of getting taken care of before they had an emergency .
So I 'm hoping that Tennessee will do that . Now , ask yourself , why are Republicans standing in the way on healthcare and so much else ?
Why do they want to turn the clock back ? Because they 're not paying attention to the people , they 're paying attention to the powerful and the special that 's why !
And there 's something else going on . A lot of the human rights , the civil rights , women 's rights , gay rights , voting rights , they 're also under attack by our Republicans friends .
They want to turn that clock back too . See , I think we can be stronger when we stand together .
I think we are better when we support each other .
I think one of America 's great assets is our diversity .
Yesterday , I gave a speech in New York about what I think we should be doing to combat this threat of terror .
I 'll tell you , it 's real . I was a senator from New York on 9/11 I have seen it .
I have seen what evil and hatred can do , so I take it very seriously .
I 'll tell you this , I will do everything in my power as your president to protect our country and to keep us safe .
But we have got to do what works . It doesn't work for us to act like we are going to shut our borders and pull up the gangplank .
That weakens us , and it also validates some of what these terrorists are saying .
We need to isolate them . We need to defeat them on the ground ; and we need to defeat them in the air ; and we need to defeat them online by going after their lies and their propaganda , and pointing out they don't care about anything except murder and hatred and viciousness .
We can win this struggle if we can stay true to who we are as Americans .
I 'll tell you something else we need to stay true to .
We need to stay true to people who are left out and left behind in our own country .
We have got some really poor places in America . We got poor places in Tennessee , don't we , mayor ?
One of the poorest places is in coal country here in Tennessee , Kentucky , West Virginia , and Arkansas .
My husband , when he was a young lawyer , did black lung disease cases .
So we need to take care of people who are left out and left behind , that is why I want to reinvest in communities .
I want to get back to where the president is a good partner with governors and county commissioners , and mayors , and city councils , and we come together to figure out how we are going to help each other .
So I need your help I know none of this is going to be easy .
We are going to have to fight hard just as I want to fight hard for you .
So I need your help . Please take out your phone right now and text join , J-O-I-N to 47246 to get involved in this campaign right now .
That 's join , J-O-I-N , to 47246 .
Sign up to help us here in Tennessee . If you are from Arkansas , sign up to help us over in Arkansas .
And then go to my website , hillaryclinton.com, and become part of this campaign .
Volunteer your hours , your time , your expertise , donate if you can just be part of what we are building here .
Because we not only want to win a campaign , we want to keep our country moving with confidence and optimism moving into the future .
We have to be really focused on what we need to do to make sure that we deliver fairness and justice and opportunity to everybody .
That is why the very first speech I gave in this campaign was about criminal justice reform and ending the era of mass incarceration in America .
It is also why I am taking on the gun lobby .
The gun lobby deserves to be pushed back . They have unfortunately made it too easy to get guns in this country .
And I know , I know that there are cases right here in Memphis .
I am well aware of the Stewart case , just as I am with cases across our country .
I have met with the mothers of so many of the young people who have died , both because of police action and because of gun violence .
We need to tackle both . We cannot let any young person become the victim of gun violence .
So that is why I need your help . If you believe as I do that America 's best days can be ahead of us , please join my campaign .
Join this effort . Let 's go win for America .
Thank you all ! At a town hall meeting in Iowa , Hillary Clinton proposed plans that support the millions of families paying for , coordinating , or providing care for aging or disabled family members .
Hillary called for the creation of a new tax credit for middle-class families who care for ailing parents and grandparents as well as reforms to protect their Social Security benefits when they work as caregivers .
She also highlighted plans to change work-family policies so they better support paid and unpaid caregivers .
Good to see you all . Thank you very much .
I am thrilled to be back in Clinton . I love saying that , that I 'm in Clinton .
And earlier today I learned that Clinton actually is named for DeWitt Clinton , one of the first governors of New York , and a man who served a really long time , and among his many accomplishments was the Erie Canal , which opened up the West for development .
I still don't have the whole story about how DeWitt Clinton came to get his name , so afterwards , somebody please tell me because I am really interested in that .
I want to thank Dan , the principal here at the Clinton Middle School , the middle school staff , and in fact , the students I know there are some students here as well .
I want to thank the chair of the Clinton County Democrats , and Mary Wolf , the state representative .
Thank you for being here . I have been really looking forward to this evening because you just heard Elizabeth tell you about coming home to take care of her mother .
This is a variation of a story that I have heard across Iowa and , indeed , across America .
I have been traveling to a lot of places with the point of actually listening to what people are experiencing , in order to give me a better sense of how I can be a president .
Not only for the big issues that make the headlines and we will talk about those : ISIS , climate change , cyber security , you name them but also all of the problems that keep families up at night .
I really do want to be a president who is there for you .
And this helps me to figure out ways to help you help yourself , help your families , help your communities .
It may be because I am from the Midwest I was born in Chicago , I was raised in a suburb I feel a strong sense of gratitude for my parents , who instilled in me a real belief in hard work and personal responsibility .
But the world has gotten much more complicated and we now have to take a step back and say ,
How do we help empower people today so that they can make the same good choices for their lives ?
Millions of families are struggling to provide care for loved ones : sometimes it 's children who are born with disability , or maybe are diagnosed with autism ; sometimes it is Alzheimer'sa parent , a spouse , a grandparent .
My mother lived with us for the end of her life , and having her there was just an amazing blessing for me .
It was such a joy to have her in my home .
Coming home for dinner , or home later that evening from the Senate or from the State Department , it was just great to be able to sit down and talk with her .
And she was so interested in everything that was going on .
But I also know it was a sense of responsibility .
Thankfully , she was in pretty good health until she passed , but there were hospitalizations , there were doctor 's appointments the kinds of things that happen in every family that I know of .
For a lot of caregivers though , it is much , much more than that .
It may mean , as Elizabeth said , really uprooting yourself and coming home to care for a parent , an aunt , an uncle , a sibling .
For some , it means missing work . For others , it means cutting back on the hours at work or cutting into personal days , family time , vacation days .
The lost wages and the work that is sometimes given up are costing families especially women , who make up the majority of both paid and unpaid caregivers , and who tend to live longer than men .
And this is also costing our economy . There is about $470 billion every year in unpaid medical support and services and lost productivity .
I started seeing this years ago . As a senator , I passed a law that gave family caregivers more support so they could get rested to take care of their own health , their own well-being , as they care for loved ones .
And as president , I will make this a national priority .
I believe we need to start investing in the caring economy .
We need to recognize the value of the work that caregivers give to all of us , both those who are paid and the great numbers of who are not .
So as president , I will propose a tax credit to help family members offset up to $ 6,000 in caregiving costs for their elderly family members .
That will help family budgets stretch , and it will help seniors maintain independence .
Because I hear all the time about how hard it is to be able to take care of all your personal needs on social security , and even if you have got a small pension .
It will provide the absolutely invaluable sense of dignity and independence .
Now , all the time that people take out of paid work to care for a family member can end up putting a big dent into their retirement benefits .
In fact , this is one of the biggest problems in Social Security : that whether a woman leaves the workforce to care for children , or leaves the workforce to care for a spouse or a parent , it means that there is then no income coming in that could be used to help calculate Social Security benefits later .
And I think we have got to recognize that for many women , this has a very serious impact on the amount of money they then draw from Social Security in order to take care of themselves .
In fact , on Social Security day , the poorest recipients are single women and divorced women who either did not work , worked par t-t ime , or worked but then stopped working because of caregiving responsibilities .
So I want to expand Social Security by taking into account the often overlooked and undervalued work of family caregivers .
I want to give you the benefits you deserve . You should be able to earn credit for Social Security .
Providing care for a loved one should not mean sacrificing your own secure retirement .
And there is a related challenge we need to take on : Many families count on home care workers for help .
I have met some of these extraordinary people who give so much of themselves in caring for others .
They often find themselves among the lowest paid people in our country .
Too many health care workers actually are living in poverty , struggling to support their own families while they care for others .
I met a woman from Nevada not so long ago who has been providing care for seniors and people with disabilities for more than four decades .
She still makes less than $10 an hour . I met a woman from Minnesota who recalls standing in the grocery store with her infant and toddler and because she was a home health care worker , she really was having a hard time trying to figure out what to buy toilet paper or laundry soap .
So today I am launching a new health care workers initiative , because I think we have got to do more increase the pay , the training , and the standing of home health care workers .
When a worker needs several agencies to create career ladders and apprenticeships to help ensure their fair pay as well as to connect them to the families who need them , it is going to require both sides because a lot of the families who get paid home care cannot afford to pay much more than they are paying .
So even though they would like to be able to see the income of the person helping them go up , it cannot come just from them .
We have got to figure out how we do this , with a combination of tax credits , subsidies , and support so that we can take care of people .
And the other point I would make is we can avoid additional expenses .
The alternatives to home health care are nursing homes , or other facilities that are much more expensive .
So how do we try to square this in a way that takes care of families , gives more support to unpaid family caregivers , and gives more support to paid caregivers at a cost that families can afford while also saving money because the alternative would be an additional burden on all of us ?
The bottom line for me is caregiving takes a lot of love , and a lot of challenging experiences that often test one 's emotional and physical wellbeing .
I remember I was in a town hall like this in Dover , New Hampshire a few months ago , and I called on a woman .
She said she literally had raced over to ask me what I was going to do about Alzheimer 's , because she was taking care of both her husband with Alzheimer 's , and her mother with Alzheimer'sand she had gotten a neighbor to come in , but could not be gone for long .
And I cannot tell you how many stories I hear like that .
A young man was taking care of his mother . She is 84 .
She has Alzheimer 's . He is a teacher . He cannot quit his job , because that is how he supports her but he cannot afford a caregiver , so he takes her to work with him .
And these are the stories that really demonstrate to me the courage and the resilience of so many people in our country .
And it is why I believe so strongly that we should be cutting taxes for hardworking families , not raising them , and giving more tax breaks to middle class families , not rich individuals and corporations .
So I am looking at the tax code at how we go after the deductions and all of the benefits that are in there , from taking away one of the worst benefits for hedge fund managers that enables them to pay a lower tax rate to going after the deductions that encourage corporations to move overseas .
I have proposed tax credits to help middle-class families pay for college and out-of-pocket health care costs .
Now I am adding the caregivers credit . I will be proposing more plans for additional tax relief and simplification , and I am laying out how I will pay for everything I propose .
I want you to know that , because I believe that it is very important to be fiscally responsible .
And to tell you , Okay , here is what I want to do , and here is how I will pay for it , because at the end of the day , we have got to deal with the economy in a way that creates more good paying jobs , raises wages and we have to make sure that the federal government is making smart investments again .
Under the Republicans , it has been really hard . But we are going to get back to a full court press on making investments that will make us richer and safer and stronger .
Now , there is a lot we can do . I know that there are a number of you that are all really involved in my campaign , and working to help me do well in the caucuses on February 1st but I want you to consider joining us .
We are really anxious to have as many people involved as possible .
You can start right now : Just take out your phone and text JOIN this is for younger people just take out your phone and text JOIN , J-O-I-N , to 47246 to get involved .
You can also go to my website , hillaryclinton.com . You can sign up to help here in Iowa .
We have got the most amazing team here who are just building an incredible organization , every one of you can be a part of it , and I am so proud I have to tell you this I am so proud that mine is the first campaign in history that the majority of my contributions are coming from women , so I really want to reach out to all of you .
and said she would seek to use regulatory authority if Congress won't act .
This announcement , made during a town hall meeting in Waterloo , Iowa , comes just weeks after Pfizer announced plans to merge with a foreign-based company mainly to avoid paying its fair share of U.S. corporate taxes .
Hillary remains committed to using the proceeds from closing these loopholes to provide incentives to bring jobs back to America and support manufacturing , research and small businesses .
This push continues her month-long focus on job creation and reinvestment in the U.S. that raises incomes for families following announcements of her $275 billion plan to invest in U.S. infrastructure last week and her comprehensive plan to win the global competition for advanced manufacturing jobs .
Thank you so much . Boy ! I 've got to tell you I am thrilled to be back here and I am delighted to have been introduced by Pavitra .
She is just one of the many extraordinary people who are helping me organize for the caucus on February 1st .
So I am grateful to her and I am grateful to all of you .
We 've got some precinct captains and leaders here who are part of my campaign team and I thank each and every one of you .
Now I want to say just a few words and then I want to answer your questions , because that 's the most important part of what we 're doing here today .
But it was exciting for me and I wanted to tell you , I went to Cedar Valley TechWorks today .
Wow , that was impressive and it was exciting to see what is happening right here in this area because of the great partnership between the University of Northern Iowa and Hawkeye Community College .
And I met young people , students , some of them seniors , a couple of them freshmen , everything in between who are learning the skills that will not only get them good jobs but will help to make this part of Iowa an advanced manufacturing center for the country and the world .
And I can't tell you how important that is . I went with Senator Bill Dotzler .
Bill is , I think , still here . Thank you Bill and also with Representative Bob Kressig .
They were both great tour guides for me . And it gave me the chance to ask a lot of questions and get to what I want to do to make it possible not only for TechWorks to be an even bigger success but how we do more of that in Iowa and across America .
I want to start though with just a few remarks about the recent event in California .
We 're all working to make sense if there is such a thing to be made out of this terrorist attack .
And I know that our local law enforcement , the FBI , our intelligence community , are working overtime as hard as they can to piece together what happened , what we can do to prevent it in the future .
I have been laying out my plans for how we defeat ISIS and how we protect ourselves from homegrown terrorist attacks and I will keep talking about that .
I will answer your questions because this election is not only about choosing a president , it is about choosing a commander-in-chief and we have to be really focused on what we need to do to show leadership and to act in accordance with our values .
This convention center , this conference center , is named , as you all know here in Waterloo for the five Sullivan brothers .
It 's hard to imagine a greater sacrifice by any family , all five of them going down on the USS Juneau , the same attack after they had said they all wanted to serve together .
When they joined the Navy , that 's what they requested .
So every time any of you drive by here or walk in here
, you just have to be reminded of the courage and the sacrifice of generations of Americans before us , who acted with resolve , not fear .
It is ok to be afraid . There is no reason not to be afraid .
When bad things happen , it does cause anxiety and fear .
But then you pull yourself together , and especially if you want to be a leader of our country , and you say , Ok , what are we going to do about it ?
You say , Ok , what are we going to do about it ?
How are we going to be prepared ? What is your plan ?
But instead of showing leadership , some of the candidates in this presidential campaign are resorting to really ugly , hateful rhetoric .
Donald Trump you know he does traffic in prejudice and paranoia .
It 's not only shameful , it 's dangerous . So when he says he wants to stop all Muslims from entering the United States , that runs counter to what I and others who have actually been in the Situation Room , making hard choices , know we have to do .
We have to enlist help from American Muslims , Muslims around the world in defeating the radical jihadists and the hateful ideology that they represent .
Instead Donald Trump is supplying them with new propaganda . He is playing right into their hands .
Now some of the other Republican candidates have finally said that these latest comments have gone too far , but the truth is a lot of them have said some pretty extreme things too .
Their language may be more veiled , less dramatic but their ideas aren't so different .
And they are also undermining our ability to pull the world together against these terrorists .
This a fight we have to win and I intend to do everything I can because it is a fight against a brutal enemy who twists a religion , Islam , to justify mass murder .
The vast majority of Muslims , here and abroad , are on our side in this fight and remind us all the time that they are the primary victims of the attacks and the brutality coming from these terrorist organizations .
A lot of them are working to try to make common cause with us to prevent radicalization .
So now is the time for all of us . I don't care what party we are .
It 's time for all of us to be united .
That 's what we 're supposed to do as Americans .
Come together , defend ourselves , take on this struggle .
So I will continue to speak out and I will continue to lay out my plans .
I 've laid about the most specific plans about how we take them on and defeat them from the air , on the ground and in cyberspace .
And I will keep advocating for what I think are strong , smart strategies .
But I 'm also here today to talk about something else we must do and that is : continue to rebuild our economy to create more good-paying jobs with rising incomes for hardworking Americans .
I know that our republican friends want us to forget about the Great Recession , don't they ?
Well I 'm not going to let them forget it .
It is a fact ; the economy does better when we have a democrat in the White House .
That is just a fact . Unemployment is lower , incomes are higher and you are four times as likely to have a recession when there is a republican in the White House .
Now I 'm not asking people to go back to ancient history ; just go back the last 35 years .
We 've had five presidents three republicans and two democrats .
Now I know both of those democrats . And I know both of them inherited economic problems from their republican predecessors .
I remember shortly after the ' 92 election , my husband saying to me
It is so much worse than they told us .
And it was . We were heading into a recession .
republicans had quadrupled the national debt of our country in the prior 12 years , under their stewardship .
So Bill got to work . At the end of eight years , we had 23 million new jobs , incomes went up for everybody the top , the middle , working folks and more people were lifted out of poverty than at any time in recent American history .
But you know , I will give the republicans this : they are consistent .
Consistently wrong , but consistent . So back they came with trickle-down economics slash taxes on the wealthy , get out of the way of corporations , don't pay attention to what 's happening in the financial markets or the mortgage markets .
And you know what happened . Shortly after the ' 08 election , President-elect Obama called me , asked me to come see him in Chicago .
I didn't know why . It turned out he wanted me to be secretary of state , but before we got to that , it was just he and I and we were talking .
And he looks at me and says , It is so much worse that they told us .
I said , president-elect , I 've heard that before !
And you know what ? It was really bad and
I want you to remember this we were losing 800,000 jobs a month , nine million Americans lost their jobs , five million homes were lost .
$13 trillion in family wealth disappeared . Now , I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for making sure we didn't fall into a Great Depression , and began working with our businesses and our families to pull us out .
So we 're standing but we 're not yet running the way America should .
I want to build on what works I have this old-fashioned idea that we should stop doing what doesn't work and start doing what does work .
Now , I 'm not running for my husband 's third term or President Obama 's third term .
I 'm running for my first term , but I 'm going to do what works to get this economy going .
Now , I 've traveled across Iowa and I 've had the great privilege of really talking and listening with folks .
I started off with small groups because I wanted to hear what was on people 's minds .
So I 've heard about the financial struggles , the economic challenges , the cost of everything going up , the unfairness that the people at the top are doing well again and a lot of folks still haven't had a raise .
And there is something fundamentally wrong when the top 25 hedge fund managers in America make more money than all the kindergarten teachers in America combined .
There 's just something really wrong about this . So my goal is to make the economy work for everybody the struggling , striving , the successful .
I want us to get back to where we were before the republicans came back into office and destroyed what my husband left behind and then handed the biggest mess they could imagine to President Obama .
Now these republicans if you hear them , they are saying the same thing .
What 's their economic agenda ? Cut taxes on the super wealthy , get out of the way of corporations , take off the regulations which we finally got put on them after they wrecked the economy .
They are consistent consistently wrong , but consistent . And I love it when they criticize the president .
They say things like , This is the slowest recovery in American history .
You 've heard that right ? You listen to the debates or you watch them and they say ,
A terrible , slow recovery . Honest to goodness , that takes a lot of nerve .
We would not had needed to recover if they hadn't drive us into the big ditch in the first place !
So I get pretty worked up about this , but let me tell you what I want to do because I think number one , more good-paying jobs , number two , raises for Americans .
Now I announced earlier this month a five-year , $275 billion plan to invest in our infrastructure on top of what the Congress finally got around to passing .
It took years for them to pass what used to be just ordinary course of business .
When I was in the Senate , we had differences , but we worked them out in order to get things done so we could build roads and repair bridges and tunnels and airports and ports and rail systems .
Everything that is important to get the economy really moving to be competitive .
So I want us to do more . We are woefully behind in what we need to do to really have a 21st century transportation system .
We need to finally get broadband Internet connectivity that is high-speed to every part of America , because that will improve jobs and education and businesses .
Now this week I 've put forth another critical piece of my jobs plan .
And that is supporting American manufacturing , which is why I was thrilled to go to TechWorks .
Reviving manufacturing , especially advanced manufacturing , is essential to creating the good jobs of the future .
Now I know there are people in our country who basically say we can't do it .
They 're really pessimistic about manufacturing . I just fundamentally disagree .
And if they would go look at what 's going on at TechWorks , they would also see the light .
There is so much America can do . When I went to Cedar Valley TechWorks , I saw the biggest 3-D printing machine in all of North America .
And I saw students and faculty teaching them how to use this new machine .
And I heard about the plans to be able to work with businesses , even rent time , help design what is needed to get manufacturing really moving into the 21st century .
It 's amazing . I want more Americans to have the chance to work with that kind of technology .
I want us to lead the world in advanced manufacturing .
I asked where that big machine was made . Germany , they said .
I said , So what are we going to do about that ?
I admire the Germans ; they have stayed on the forefront of advanced manufacturing .
And I was really happy when the answer from the faculty member came back :
We 're working with some folks in Ohio , we 're going to see if we can't figure out how to produce this machine in America .
That 's the kind of thinking that I really want as president to promote more of .
We 've got to look again into the future . We 've got to be confident about what we can do .
And I was so pleased that Bill and Bob told me how hard they have fought to make that possible , to get the state legislature , no easy task , to go along with buying that kind of machinery .
But if we don't invest in the future , we won't be able to shape the future .
And that 's what I want to do and that 's why my plan includes what 's called a New Manufacturing Renaissance Tax Credit .
It 's aimed at driving more investment to communities that have lost manufacturing jobs .
To stop the downward spirals . You know it here in Iowa .
I see it all over our country . A factory cuts back or even leaves , it 's devastating to the community and we need to get in ahead of time .
And we need to have a kind of SWAT team response , to be able to help communities invest in something new .
And we need to have the Federal government working with the state , and local government , the private sector , great colleges like Hawkeye and UNI . Second , we have to do more to help prepare American workers to compete for these advanced manufacturing jobs .
That 's what I saw today . I wish everybody had been with me to meet these young people .
They were so impressive . They are all from around here .
They are all studying to try to become a real master of advanced manufacturing , using these 3-D printing machines .
I am proposing more training programs and apprenticeships , including a $1500 tax credit for every apprentice a business hires .
Because I want businesses to be working hand in hand with organized labor to help train the workforce of the future .
Now you can ask and you should : how do we pay for this ?
Well we pay for the investments in our manufacturing sector here at home by closing those loopholes that make it easy for the wealthy corporations to avoid paying their fair share of taxes .
Now I am passionate about this , because the maneuvers that powerful corporations are using to game the system and leave everybody else holding the bag are just offensive to me .
Let me just mention one : you may have heard of something called an inversion .
This is a technical term for a trick . An American company merges with a smaller , foreign company so it can move overseas on paper and then avoid paying its fair share of taxes here in the United States .
And then once they 're overseas , they can exploit even more loopholes like moving profits to a country with even lower tax rates .
That 's a trick called earnings stripping . Now corporations that use tax games like these end up paying a lot less to the United States Treasury .
Now you may have seen in the news about the proposed merger of Pfizer , a huge American drug company , with a much smaller Irish drug company .
That 's an example of an inversion . A big company goes looking for a small company in a place where the taxes are lower and then they claim that they are moving the important assets of the company there .
Now all told , inversions by Pfizer and the companies plus related loopholes , will cost American taxpayers more than $80 billion over the next 10 years .
That 's money we should be investing right here and it 's not right .
Think about how much we have spent over many years , we taxpayers , helping create the conditions that let corporations succeed here , like Pfizer and other drug companies .
They have created new drugs with help from federally funded drug research .
They 've also counted on the FDA to give them the go-ahead .
Think about all these companies that rely on our infrastructure , our legal system , our police , our Fire Departments , our schools , our health care system every single day .
Now some do the right thing and pay their fair share of taxes , but others are doing everything they can to avoid them .
Fundamentally , this is not only about fairness ; this is about patriotism .
If you become successful in America if you have the chance to start a business because of the freedom that young men like the five Sullivan brothers gave their lives to preserve , if you have benefited from American tax dollars and have flourished because of all the things that make America great , you should pay what you owe just like everybody else .
So here 's what I am proposing : first , Congress should act to stop these inversions like Pfizer 's .
Second , I 'm calling on Congress to impose something called an exit tax on the untaxed earnings of corporations that they stash overseas .
I 'm going to raise the cost to these corporations that try to get out of paying their fair share .
And third , I 'm announcing today that as president , I would close loopholes like what 's called
earnings stripping that corporations are exploiting . And if Congress won't act , then I will ask the Treasury Department when I 'm there to use its regulatory authority , if that 's what it takes .
Here 's the bottom line : corporations don't need a tax break ; you do .
And I 'm the only candidate in this campaign who has said , I want to raise your incomes , not your taxes .
And as I lay out more proposals , including fighting against unfair trade practices and currency manipulation , we will look for ways how we can compete and win in the global economy .
I 'm excited about what we can do together , but I need your help .
I 'm asking you to join us and you can do it right now by texting join ,
J-O-I-N , to 47246 . I 'm asking you to talk to your friends , your neighbors , your family if you are together over the holidays .
Make sure everyone you know in Iowa is ready to caucus on February 1st .
How many of you have ever caucused before ? Okay , thank you for that and those of you who haven't , come [ inaudible ] this historic tradition that Iowa has pioneered .
Together , we can win Iowa and then , once we do that , we 'll turn around and start working to win in November against whoever the republicans nominate as their candidate and to build the kind of future that I saw at TechWorks today .
Thank you all very much ! Hillary Clinton delivered the following remarks at an event with Senator Bernie Sanders in Portsmouth , New Hampshire
Thank you ! That was so great . Hello , New Hampshire !
It is so great , it is so great to be here with so many friends , old and new . to be back with so many friends old and new .
Thank you ! Thank you so much . I have to say it is such a great privilege to be here with Senator Sanders .
Being here with him and New Hampshire , I can't help but reflect on how much more enjoyable this election is going to be now that we 're on the same side .
Because you know what ? We are stronger together . And I want to give a special thanks to someone who has been with Senator Sanders every step of the way , not just throughout this campaign but over the years , his wonderful wife , Jane Sanders .
And also I 've had the pleasure of meeting his son , Levi Sanders !
Thank you ! I also appreciate greatly having the opportunity for all of us to hear from the speakers beforehand , Governor Maggie Hassan , the next Senator from the state of New Hampshire !
Senator Jeanne Shaheen who is doing a tremendous job for you .
And we are delighted to have heard from and to have with us Bill McKibben and Jim Dean .
Over these last few weeks , Bernie and I have worked together on plans to put college within reach for more people , and to ensure that everyone in America has access to quality , affordable health care .
And now , with your help , we are joining forces to defeat Donald Trump , win in November , and yes , together build a future we can all believe in .
Just as Bernie said , over the years , I 've gotten to know him as a colleague and a friend .
His reputation for passionate advocacy hasn't always made him the most popular person in Washington .
But you know what ? That 's generally a sign you 're doing something right .
Throughout this campaign Senator Sanders has brought people off the sidelines and into the political process .
He has energized and inspired a generation of young people who care deeply about our country , and are building a movement that is bigger than one candidate or one campaign .
So thank you , thank you Bernie for your endorsement , but more than that , thank you for your lifetime of fighting injustice .
I am proud to be fighting alongside you because my friends , this is a time for all of us to stand together .
These have been difficult times for America . This is a time for all of us to stand together because these have been difficult days for our country .
Taking on the systemic racism that plagues our country and rebuilding the frayed bonds of trust and respect between law enforcement and the communities they serve will require contributions from all of us .
And we have to begin by starting to listen to each other .
And more than that , we then have to do something that will help us fix these problems .
We have to reform our broken criminal justice system , take back our democracy from the wealthy special interests , and make our economy work for everyone , not just those at the top .
And you know what ? We have to do all these things at the same time .
That 's why throughout this campaign , we 've been calling for eliminating racial profiling and disparities in sentencing .
Ending the era of mass incarceration , dismantling the school-to-prison pipeline , providing more employment opportunities for formerly incarcerated people .
In addition to that , I am proposing two new steps that get law enforcement the support they need while also stopping the tragedy , the tragedy of black men and women and black children being killed in police incidents .
First , let 's bring law enforcement and the communities they swear to protect and serve together to develop national guidelines on the use of force by police officers .
And second , let 's provide better training on implicit bias , that remains a problem even in our best police departments but it also remains a problem across our society .
I 'm asking for all of us to really search our hearts and minds to make sure that we don't have those implicit biases .
Let 's learn from police departments like Dallas that had made strong progress , and apply their lessons nationwide .
Because everyone in every community benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone is respected by the law .
Remember , when gunfire broke out in Dallas , the peaceful protestors and the crowds that had gathered to support them ran to safety , while the police officers who just minutes before had been talking with and taking pictures with and protecting the protesters
the police officers ran the other way they ran into the gunfire .
That 's the kind of courage and dedication our police and first responders show every single day .
So yes let 's take real , meaningful action to end the epidemic of gun violence in America .
From Sandy Hook to Orlando to Dallas , and so many other places , these tragedies tear at our soul .
And so do the incidents that don't even dominate the headlines .
Just this past Sunday , a young man , Seth Rich , who worked for the Democratic National Committee to expand voting rights , was shot and killed in his neighborhood in Washington .
He was just 27 years old . Surely we can agree that weapons of war have no place on the streets of America .
Our police and first responders should never have to face a madman , a racist , a person filled with hatred , with an assault weapon .
We owe it to every officer who puts his or her life on the line to protect us
so let 's protect them . And we can't stop there .
This is part of a broader challenge across our country .
Inequality is too high , wages are too low , and it is just too hard to get ahead for too many Americans .
We need an economy that works for everyone , not just those at the top .
Not just the millionaires and billionaires but everybody . And to do that , we need to go big and we need to go bold .
This isn't a time for half measures . So we are setting five ambitious goals .
For starters , in my first 100 days as President , we will make the biggest investment in new , good-paying jobs since World War II .
More jobs here in New Hampshire and across our country , especially in places that have been left out and left behind .
In communities of color . In coal country . Indian Country .
Everywhere where a person deserves the same shot at the American Dream as anybody else in our country .
And when I say good-paying jobs , I mean it .
As Bernie said , Donald Trump thinks wages are too high .
He actually stood on a debate stage and said so .
He does want to get rid of the federal minimum wage altogether .
Well , both Senator Sanders and I believe anyone who is willing to work hard should be able to find a job that pays well enough to support a family .
And Bernie is right $7.25 an hour is a starvation wage .
So sorry Donald , if you 're watching , we 're not cutting the minimum wage
we 're raising the minimum wage . We 're going to create millions of good jobs by making America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century .
As Bernie reminds us so powerfully , we owe it to future generations to work together to combat climate change .
And we 're going to do it . We 've got the intelligence .
We 've got the innovation . We 're going to roll up our sleeves and demonstrate to the world what America is made of .
We 're going to have that clean energy economy . We 're going to make it work for everybody .
And make no mistake we will defend American jobs and American workers by saying no to the assaults on the right to organize and bargain collectively .
And we 're going to say no to attacks on working families and
no to bad trade deals and unfair trade practices , including the Trans-Pacific Partnership .
Second , we 're going to make college debt-free for all and help millions of people struggling with existing student debt save thousands of dollars .
Here in New Hampshire , students are carrying one of the highest debt loads in the country .
I 've heard from young people who can't start a business , move out of their parents ' home , or even get married because of all the student debt holding them back .
So with your help , we 're going to make it so future students won't have to borrow a dime to attend public colleges or universities .
Thanks to the new proposal Senator Sanders and I worked on together , for families making less than $ 125,000 a year , we will eliminate tuition at those schools altogether .
And we will do more to help students cover all the costs of getting an education including books , supplies , and living expenses .
Because in the words of a student I met here in New Hampshire , paying for college shouldn't be the hardest thing about going to college .
Third , we 're going to rewrite the rules , and crack down on companies that ship jobs and profits overseas .
Let 's reward the companies that share profits with their employees instead .
And we will defend and strengthen the tough reforms President Obama put in place on the financial industry not let Donald Trump tear them up .
Because we do , we do need to make sure that Wall Street can never wreck Main Street again .
Number four , we 're going to make sure Wall Street , corporations , and the super-rich pay their fair share of taxes .
When people say the game is rigged , the best evidence is our tax code .
It is riddled with scams , loopholes , and special breaks .
It is wrong that some millionaires do pay a lower tax rate than their secretaries , and we 're going to stop it .
Now compare what Senator Sanders and I intend to do with Donald Trump 's tax plan .
His tax plan would make our current system even worse .
Independent analysts say he would add $30 trillion to the national debt in order to give a massive gift to the wealthiest Americans , Wall Street money managers , and our largest corporations .
But after all , what else should we expect from someone who calls himself
the King of Debt ? Now we have been pointing out the problems with his tax plan for months .
And I think Donald is starting to feel the pressure .
In fact , even as we speak , he 's apparently bringing in the biggest names in trickle-down , supply-side economics to help him figure out what to do
now these are the same advisors who brought us 30 years of a disastrous Republican philosophy that gave the huge breaks to those at the top .
Now you don't have to be psychic to know what 's going to happen next : they 're going to come back with another plan with maybe some bells and whistles , Bernie , that tries to disguise the fact that they still are slashing taxes for the wealthy , large corporations , and Donald Trump himself .
And they 'll try to use voodoo economics to tell us all the ways it will actually help the economy .
But they 're not fooling anybody , at least I hope they 're not .
Just like his current plan which he calls inspiring , tremendous , and amazing
you know , he uses a lot of adjectives to avoid telling you any specifics .
Here 's what we know for sure : whatever he comes out with next is going to give huge tax cuts to the corporations and the rich at the expense of the middle class .
Now there 's that old saying , you 've heard it , I used to hear it a lot in Arkansas , you can put lipstick on a pig
but it 's still a pig . And I 've got to tell you , the first time that the Republicans pulled the voodoo economics , you know , they fooled us .
Shame on them . But if they come back with the same argument and people fall for it , shame on us .
But I will promise you this , Senator Sanders and I will spare no effort to make sure the people of America know that once again Trump and his cronies are trying to pull the wool over our eyes and come back with the same failed policies that hurt us before .
We 're not going to let them get away with it again .
And finally , our fifth goal is we 're going to step up and respond to the way American families actually live and work in the 21st century .
Our families and our workplaces have changed , so isn't it time for our policies to change too ?
Let 's expand Social Security to match today 's realities , not cut or privatize it .
Let 's join the rest of the developed world and offer paid family leave .
And finally , let 's guarantee equal pay for women once and for all .
I can just envision the tweets Donald is putting together .
And Donald Trump can accuse me of playing the woman card all he wants .
If fighting for equal pay and paid family leave is playing the woman card , then deal me in .
And I 'll tell you , these aren't just my fights .
These are Bernie 's fights . These are America 's fights .
And I feel with all my being , these are fights we have to wage and win together .
As Bernie and his supporters have argued so eloquently , we won't get anywhere unless we overhaul our campaign finance system .
It is past time to end the stranglehold of wealthy special interests in Washington , and get back to government of the people , by the people , and for the people .
That 's why as president from my very first days , I 'll make campaign finance reform a top priority .
We will do everything we can to overturn Citizens United .
And we will require everybody Democrats , Republicans , and Independents , whoever to disclose their donors .
And while we 're at it , we are going to create a small-donor matching system to make it easy for more Americans to be elected at every level of government .
Because just like Bernie , I 've met so many people here in New Hampshire with great ideas for our country .
I want to see you run for office and win .
And here 's another radical idea : Let 's make it easier to vote , not harder .
Let 's fight back against attacks on voting rights across the country attacks that disproportionately affect low-income voters , people of color , students , the elderly , and women .
That means we need to restore the Voting Rights Act and then keep going .
All Americans should be automatically registered to vote on their 18th birthday .
Every state should have at least 20 days of in-person voting .
And no one in America should ever have to wait more than 30 minutes to cast their ballot .
So Senator Sanders and I will be working to get unaccountable money out of politics and the voices of everyday Americans back in .
Because as Bernie has said : This isn't a progressive issue . It 's not a conservative issue .
It 's an American issue . And let me close with this
: To everyone here and everyone across the country who poured your heart and soul into Senator Sanders ' campaign , thank you .
Thank you . I was proud of the campaign we ran , it was a campaign about issues not insults .
And our country desperately needs your voices and involvement and so does this campaign and so does the Democratic Party .
Because you know what ? we need to take back the Senate and take back the House and make sure we have Democratic governors and Democratic state legislators .
Let 's open the doors to everyone who shares our progressive values .
This is one of the most important elections in our lifetimes .
So I 'm asking you to stand with us . And then , I 'm asking you to keep working with me in the weeks , months , and , yes , years ahead .
You will always have a seat at the table when I 'm in the White House .
As Bernie will tell you , talk is cheap . We need to keep fighting to make sure everything we 've stood for is real in the lives of people across America .
This amazing country of ours is worthy of our best efforts .
This election , let 's send a clear message : In America , we don't tear each other down we lift each other up .
We build bridges , not walls . We put common interest ahead of self-interest .
We stand together because we 're stronger together . So I need your help .
Please join this campaign . Make it your own . You can take out your phone right now and text JOIN , J-O-I-N , to 47246 .
Or go to hillaryclinton.com . We accept $27 donations , too , you know .
I can't tell you how grateful I am to be standing here with Senator Sanders .
Because I think both of us realize that each of our campaigns together represent the best of who we are .
And now it is time for us to take that message to the rest of the country .
I am fully aware that the other side will do everything possible to distort , to misinform , and we can't let that happen .
We have to be standing up and fighting for the America that we know we can create together .
I am confident and optimistic about our future , particularly when it comes to young people .
I think America 's best years are still ahead of us .
So join with us . Let 's make this happen together and win the election !
Thank you very much ! Hello ! Hi . Thank you all very , very much , please be seated , it 's wonderful being back here .
It 's always a special privilege having grown up in Chicago in the suburbs to be here in the state capitol and especially here in this great historic place filled with so much meaning , not just for Illinois but for our country .
And I 'm delighted to have this opportunity to talk with you about the state of our country today .
Nearly 160 years ago , Abraham Lincoln gave a speech in this statehouse that marked a turning point in the political life of our nation .
The question of slavery was being fiercely debated across America .
Roughly half the states allowed it . Half abolished it .
And some people including Lincoln believed that until it was gone entirely , our country would never be truly united and at peace .
So on June 16 , 1858 , when Mr. Lincoln kicked off his campaign for the United States Senate , he delivered an address on how slavery was tearing our country apart .
And that it must go . Some thought that he ended up losing that Senate race because of that speech .
But then he won the Presidency . And some thought it was because of that speech .
President Lincoln led America during the most challenging period in our nation 's history .
He defended our Union , our Constitution , and the ideal of a nation conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal . '
His legacy included laws and amendments that enshrined those values for future generations .
They protect and guide us still . I 'm here today , in this place , because the words Lincoln spoke all those years ago still hold resonance for us now .
Remember , he said , A house divided against itself cannot stand .
I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free .
I do not expect , ' he went on ,
The Union to be dissolved ; I do not expect the house to fall .
But I do expect it will cease to be divided .
It will become all one thing or all the other . '
The challenges we face today do not approach those of Lincoln 's time .
Not even close . And we should be very clear about that .
But recent events have left people across America asking hard questions about whether we are still a house divided .
Despite our best efforts and highest hopes , America 's long struggle with race is far from finished .
In just the past week , we saw black men killed by police and five police officers killed by a sniper targeting white police .
There is too much violence and hate in our country .
Too little trust and common ground . It can feel impossible to have the conversations we need to have , to fix what 's broken .
And despite being the richest country on earth , we have too much economic inequality and that also undermines the foundation of our democracy .
Lincoln understood that threat , too . He deeply believed everyone deserved in his words
a fair chance in the race of life . '
He saw it as a defining feature of the United States , and believed it was vital that hard-working people be free to enjoy the fruits of their own labor .
It 's one of the reasons he was so strongly against slavery because it violated that entire notion .
And as President , he took pains to use the tools of government to create more economic opportunity for Americans at every level of society .
So , too , must we fight inequality and create opportunity in our time not just for some Americans , but for all .
So I come today as a mother and a grandmother to two beautiful little children .
Who , I want them and all our children to grow up in a country where violence like the kind we saw last week doesn't happen again and where the American Dream is big enough for everyone .
I 'm also here as a candidate for President who is deeply concerned about the divisions that still hold our people apart and our nation back .
I believe that our future peace and prosperity depends on whether we meet this moment with honesty and courage .
That means taking a hard look at our laws and our attitudes .
It means embracing policies that promote justice for all people , and standing firm against any attempt to roll back the clock on the rights and opportunities that so many sacrificed so much to secure .
And all of that starts with doing a better job of listening to each other .
We need to listen to the families whose loved ones have been killed in police incidents .
Alton Sterling and Philando Castile are just the latest in a long and painful litany of African Americans dying after encounters with police officers .
We remember Laquan McDonald , killed in Chicago a year and a half ago and Sandra Bland , who grew up in Illinois who died one year ago today .
Time after time , no one is held accountable . And surely we can all agree that 's deeply wrong and needs to change .
And yes we do need to listen to those who say
Black Lives Matter . ' Too many black Americans , especially young men , feel like their lives are disposable .
And they worry every single day about what might happen .
They have reason to feel that way . And it 's absolutely unacceptable .
Everyone in America , everyone deserves to be treated with respect and dignity .
Surely that is something we can all unite behind . We need to acknowledge the five Latinos who also lost their lives in police incidents last week .
Their stories didn't get national media coverage , but their families and communities are mourning too .
And at the same time , we need to listen to the dedicated , principled police officers working hard every day to rebuild trust with the communities they serve and protect .
Our men and women in blue put their lives on the line everyday to keep us safe and keep our democracy strong .
Remember what Michael Krol , Michael Smith , Lorne Ahrens , Brent Thompson and Patrick Zamarripa were doing when they died .
They were protecting a peaceful march . They were people cloaked in authority making sure their fellow citizens could exercise their right to protest authority .
And there 's nothing more vital to our democracy than that .
And they gave their lives for it . David Brown , the Dallas police chief , said that when it comes to overcoming systemic racism and so many other problems in society , we ask too much of the police and too little of everyone else .
I think he 's absolutely right . This is our problem , and we all need to work together to solve it .
We also need to listen to the families crying out for relief from gun violence .
President Obama 's trip to Dallas yesterday was the 11th time he has spoken to a city in mourning after a mass shooting .
The wrong people keep getting their hands on guns . And not just any guns
military weapons , like the kind that the Dallas killer had , which allowed him to outgun the police .
And the vast majority of gun owners agree : we have to come together around common sense steps to prevent gun violence .
If we 're looking for common ground this is common ground .
And I hope that we will , from Washington , to Springfield to everywhere across America , come to agreement about that .
Now I understand that just saying these things together may upset some people .
I 'm talking about police reform just a few days after a horrific attack on police officers .
I 'm talking about courageous , honorable police officers just a few days after officer-involved shootings in Louisiana and Minnesota .
I 'm bringing up guns in a country where just talking about comprehensive background checks and getting assault weapons off our streets gets you demonized .
But all these things can be true at the same time .
We do need criminal justice reform to save lives and to make sure all Americans are treated as equals in rights and dignity .
We do need to support our police departments that are trying to get it right , and honor the men and women who protect us every day .
We do need to do more to stop gun violence .
We may disagree about how to do these things , but surely we can all agree with those basic premises .
And I hope and pray the past week has showed us how true they are .
Now , these are the issues on many of our minds right now .
And if we stop there , that would leave us with plenty of work to do .
So I wish I could say that was everything that we must address .
But these events are taking place against a much broader backdrop of fear and anxiety .
So I think we have to face all of it .
We do need to make sure our economy works for everyone , not just those at the top .
The changes that have roiled our economy over the past few decades are not just numbers on a page that economists study .
They are real forces that families are dealing with up close and personal every day .
Not long ago , I met with factory workers here in Illinois whose jobs are being sent abroad , and heard how painful the consequences have been for them and their families .
I 've talked to workers across our country who 've seen good jobs lost to technologies , who keep being told to get more training even though that often doesn't lead to a good new job on the other end .
These economic disruptions have stripped too many people of their sense of security and dignity .
And that can have devastating consequences . We have to ask ourselves , why are drug addiction and suicide on the rise in parts of our country ?
That 's not just about economics . It 's about something deeper , that is connected to economics : a sense of dislocation , even a pessimism about whether America still holds anything for them or cares about them at all .
That 's why I 've pledged that in my first 100 days as President , we will make the biggest investment in new , good-paying jobs since World War II . We need more jobs you can support a family on , especially in places that have been left out and left behind from Coal Country to Indian Country to inner cities , to every place that 's been hollowed out when a factory closed or a mine shut down because everyone in America deserves that fair chance in the race of life ' that President Lincoln described .
Now , I realize that our politics have contributed to the sense of division many Americans feel right now .
And as someone in the middle of a hotly fought political campaign , I cannot stand here and claim that my words and actions haven't sometimes fueled the partisanship that often stands in the way of progress .
So I recognize I have to do better too . I 'm running for President with the belief that we need to face up to these challenges and fix them in order to become a stronger , fairer country .
And in times like these , we need a President who can help pull us together , not split us apart .
And that is why I believe Donald Trump is so dangerous .
His campaign is as divisive as any we have seen in our lifetimes .
It is built on stoking mistrust and pitting American against American .
It 's there in everything he says and everything he promises to do as President .
It 's there in how he wants to ban Muslims from coming to the United States , and toyed with creating a database to track Muslims in America .
It 's there in the way he demeans women , in his promotion of an anti-Semitic image pushed by neo-Nazis , and in the months that he spent trying to discredit the citizenship and legitimacy of our first black President .
Last night in an interview , he said that he understands systemic bias against black people because
and I quote even against me , the system is rigged ' unquote .
He went on to say , I can relate to it very much myself . '
Even this the killing of people is somehow all about him .
It 's there in his proposals on immigration . He says he 'll round up 11 million people and kick them out .
He 's actually described a special deportation force that would go around America , pulling people out of their homes and workplaces , pulling children out of school .
I got a letter from a mother the other day who said her adopted son asked her with a shaky voice if President Trump would send him back to Ethiopia .
When kids are scared by political candidates and policy debates , it 's a sign something has gone badly wrong .
And we see it in the violence that Donald Trump encouraged toward protesters at his rallies , and the strange things he has said about the violence that will occur if we don't elect him .
He says that if he doesn't win this November , we and again I quote
won't even have a country anymore , ' America 's not going to continue to survive . '
I do not know what he 's talking about . But I do know we don't need that kind of fear-mongering not now , not ever .
And he 's gone even further even than that . He has taken aim at some of our most cherished democratic values and institutions .
He wants to revoke the citizenship of 4 million Americans born in this country to immigrant parents , and eliminate the bedrock principle enshrined in the 14th Amendment that if you 're born in America , you 're a citizen of America .
He said that a distinguished American , born in Indiana , a judge can't be trusted to do his job because his parents were Mexican ; he called him a Mexican judge ' over and over again .
He knew that the judge had been born in Indiana .
But it was a cynical , calculated attempt to fan the flames of racial division .
And designed to undermine people 's faith in our judicial system .
Why would someone running for President want to do that ?
And even that 's not all . He says , as Commander-in-Chief , he would order our troops to commit war crimes , and insisted they would follow his orders , even though that goes against decades of military training and the military code .
He 's banished members of the press who have criticized him is there any doubt he would do the same as President ?
Imagine if he had not just Twitter and cable news to go after his critics and opponents , but also the IRS or for that matter , our entire military .
Given what we have seen and heard , do any of us think he 'd be restrained ?
And he has shown contempt for and ignorance of our Constitution .
Last week , he met with House Republicans in Washington to try to assuage their serious concerns about him .
One member asked whether he 'd protect Article I , which defines the separation of powers between Congress and the executive branch .
Here 's the answer he reportedly gave : I want to protect Article One , Article Two , Article Twelve . '
Well here 's the thing there is no Article Twelve not even close .
That was a serious question , from an elected representative , and he either didn't care enough to answer it seriously or he didn't know where to begin .
Even the most stalwart Republicans were alarmed by that . And well they , and we , should be .
The first thing a new President does is take an oath to protect and defend ' the Constitution .
To do that with any meaning , you 've got to know what 's in it .
And you 've got to respect what 's in it .
I do wish Donald Trump would listen to other people once in awhile .
He might actually learn something . But he 's made it clear that 's not his thing .
As he has said , he only listens to himself .
This man is the nominee of the Party of Lincoln .
We are watching it become the Party of Trump . And that 's not just a huge loss for our democracy it is a threat to it .
Because Donald Trump 's campaign adds up to an ugly , dangerous message to America .
A message that you should be afraid afraid of people whose ethnicity is different , or religious faith is different , or who were born in a different country or hold different political beliefs .
Make no mistake there are things to fear in this world , and we need to be clear-eyed about them .
But we are each other 's countrymen and women . We share this miraculous country .
This land and its heritage is yours , mine and everyone 's willing to pledge allegiance and understand the solemn responsibilities of American citizenship .
That 's what indivisible ' means that big word that every grade school student knows
that we 're in this together , even if that 's not always easy .
So let 's think better of each other . Let 's hold together in the face of our challenges not turn on each other or tear each other down .
Let 's put ourselves in the shoes of police officers , kissing their kids and spouses goodbye every day and heading off to a dangerous job we need them to do .
Let 's put ourselves in the shoes of African Americans and Latinos , and try as best we can to imagine what it would be like if we had to have the talk ' with our kids about how carefully they need to act because the slightest wrong move could get them hurt or killed .
And yes , let 's put ourselves in the shoes of Donald Trump 's supporters .
We may disagree on the causes and the solutions to the challenges we face
but I believe like anyone else , they 're trying to figure out their place in a fast-changing America .
They want to know how to make a good living and how to give their kids better futures and opportunities .
That 's why we 've got to reclaim the promise of America for all our people no matter who they vote for .
And let 's be more than allies to each other .
Let 's take on each other 's struggles as our own .
My life 's work is built on the conviction that we are stronger together .
Not separated into factions or sides . Not shouting over each other , but together .
Our economy is stronger when everyone contributes to it , and everyone can benefit from the work they do .
Our communities are stronger when we all pull together to solve our problems and restore our faith in each other , and by doing so in the promise of America .
Our country is stronger when we work with our friends and allies to promote peace , prosperity , and security around the world .
This is an idea that goes back to the founding of America , when 13 separate colonies found a way despite their differences to join together as one nation .
They knew they were not stronger on their own , and neither are we .
I 've had the great delight of seeing the musical Hamilton .
And I hope more people at least get a chance to listen to the score and to hear the words .
There 's a great song by the character playing George Washington who sings , History 's eyes are on us . '
That was true then , and that 's true today .
If we do this right , and if we have the hard conversations we need to have , we will become stronger still like steel tempered by fire .
Now don't get me wrong , fierce debates are part of who we are they started at my dinner table with my father , and have continued ever since .
It is who we are . You 're reminded of that when you read history , when you think about the Lincoln-Douglas Debates .
Debate over the right way forward . And sometimes we have to balance competing values like freedom and order , justice and security , these are complementary values of American life .
That isn't easy . Previous generations have had to overcome terrible challenges .
And no one more so than Abraham Lincoln . But in the end , if we do the work , we will cease to be divided .
We , in fact , will be indivisible with liberty and justice for all .
And we will remain in Lincoln 's words the last , best hope of earth .
Thank you all very much . Hello ! Hi .
Thank you all very , very much , please be seated , it 's wonderful being back here .
It 's always a special privilege having grown up in Chicago in the suburbs to be here in the state capitol and especially here in this great historic place filled with so much meaning , not just for Illinois but for our country .
And I 'm delighted to have this opportunity to talk with you about the state of our country today .
Nearly 160 years ago , Abraham Lincoln gave a speech in this statehouse that marked a turning point in the political life of our nation .
The question of slavery was being fiercely debated across America .
Roughly half the states allowed it . Half abolished it .
And some people including Lincoln believed that until it was gone entirely , our country would never be truly united and at peace .
So on June 16 , 1858 , when Mr. Lincoln kicked off his campaign for the United States Senate , he delivered an address on how slavery was tearing our country apart .
And that it must go . Some thought that he ended up losing that Senate race because of that speech .
But then he won the Presidency . And some thought it was because of that speech .
President Lincoln led America during the most challenging period in our nation 's history .
He defended our Union , our Constitution , and the ideal of a nation conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal . '
His legacy included laws and amendments that enshrined those values for future generations .
They protect and guide us still . I 'm here today , in this place , because the words Lincoln spoke all those years ago still hold resonance for us now .
Remember , he said , A house divided against itself cannot stand .
I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free .
I do not expect , ' he went on ,
The Union to be dissolved ; I do not expect the house to fall .
But I do expect it will cease to be divided .
It will become all one thing or all the other . '
The challenges we face today do not approach those of Lincoln 's time .
Not even close . And we should be very clear about that .
But recent events have left people across America asking hard questions about whether we are still a house divided .
Despite our best efforts and highest hopes , America 's long struggle with race is far from finished .
In just the past week , we saw black men killed by police and five police officers killed by a sniper targeting white police .
There is too much violence and hate in our country .
Too little trust and common ground . It can feel impossible to have the conversations we need to have , to fix what 's broken .
And despite being the richest country on earth , we have too much economic inequality and that also undermines the foundation of our democracy .
Lincoln understood that threat , too . He deeply believed everyone deserved in his words
a fair chance in the race of life . '
He saw it as a defining feature of the United States , and believed it was vital that hard-working people be free to enjoy the fruits of their own labor .
It 's one of the reasons he was so strongly against slavery because it violated that entire notion .
And as President , he took pains to use the tools of government to create more economic opportunity for Americans at every level of society .
So , too , must we fight inequality and create opportunity in our time not just for some Americans , but for all .
So I come today as a mother and a grandmother to two beautiful little children .
Who , I want them and all our children to grow up in a country where violence like the kind we saw last week doesn't happen again and where the American Dream is big enough for everyone .
I 'm also here as a candidate for President who is deeply concerned about the divisions that still hold our people apart and our nation back .
I believe that our future peace and prosperity depends on whether we meet this moment with honesty and courage .
That means taking a hard look at our laws and our attitudes .
It means embracing policies that promote justice for all people , and standing firm against any attempt to roll back the clock on the rights and opportunities that so many sacrificed so much to secure .
And all of that starts with doing a better job of listening to each other .
We need to listen to the families whose loved ones have been killed in police incidents .
Alton Sterling and Philando Castile are just the latest in a long and painful litany of African Americans dying after encounters with police officers .
We remember Laquan McDonald , killed in Chicago a year and a half ago and Sandra Bland , who grew up in Illinois who died one year ago today .
Time after time , no one is held accountable . And surely we can all agree that 's deeply wrong and needs to change .
And yes we do need to listen to those who say
Black Lives Matter . ' Too many black Americans , especially young men , feel like their lives are disposable .
And they worry every single day about what might happen .
They have reason to feel that way . And it 's absolutely unacceptable .
Everyone in America , everyone deserves to be treated with respect and dignity .
Surely that is something we can all unite behind . We need to acknowledge the five Latinos who also lost their lives in police incidents last week .
Their stories didn't get national media coverage , but their families and communities are mourning too .
And at the same time , we need to listen to the dedicated , principled police officers working hard every day to rebuild trust with the communities they serve and protect .
Our men and women in blue put their lives on the line everyday to keep us safe and keep our democracy strong .
Remember what Michael Krol , Michael Smith , Lorne Ahrens , Brent Thompson and Patrick Zamarripa were doing when they died .
They were protecting a peaceful march . They were people cloaked in authority making sure their fellow citizens could exercise their right to protest authority .
And there 's nothing more vital to our democracy than that .
And they gave their lives for it . David Brown , the Dallas police chief , said that when it comes to overcoming systemic racism and so many other problems in society , we ask too much of the police and too little of everyone else .
I think he 's absolutely right . This is our problem , and we all need to work together to solve it .
We also need to listen to the families crying out for relief from gun violence .
President Obama 's trip to Dallas yesterday was the 11th time he has spoken to a city in mourning after a mass shooting .
The wrong people keep getting their hands on guns . And not just any guns
military weapons , like the kind that the Dallas killer had , which allowed him to outgun the police .
And the vast majority of gun owners agree : we have to come together around common sense steps to prevent gun violence .
If we 're looking for common ground this is common ground .
And I hope that we will , from Washington , to Springfield to everywhere across America , come to agreement about that .
Now I understand that just saying these things together may upset some people .
I 'm talking about police reform just a few days after a horrific attack on police officers .
I 'm talking about courageous , honorable police officers just a few days after officer-involved shootings in Louisiana and Minnesota .
I 'm bringing up guns in a country where just talking about comprehensive background checks and getting assault weapons off our streets gets you demonized .
But all these things can be true at the same time .
We do need criminal justice reform to save lives and to make sure all Americans are treated as equals in rights and dignity .
We do need to support our police departments that are trying to get it right , and honor the men and women who protect us every day .
We do need to do more to stop gun violence .
We may disagree about how to do these things , but surely we can all agree with those basic premises .
And I hope and pray the past week has showed us how true they are .
Now , these are the issues on many of our minds right now .
And if we stop there , that would leave us with plenty of work to do .
So I wish I could say that was everything that we must address .
But these events are taking place against a much broader backdrop of fear and anxiety .
So I think we have to face all of it .
We do need to make sure our economy works for everyone , not just those at the top .
The changes that have roiled our economy over the past few decades are not just numbers on a page that economists study .
They are real forces that families are dealing with up close and personal every day .
Not long ago , I met with factory workers here in Illinois whose jobs are being sent abroad , and heard how painful the consequences have been for them and their families .
I 've talked to workers across our country who 've seen good jobs lost to technologies , who keep being told to get more training even though that often doesn't lead to a good new job on the other end .
These economic disruptions have stripped too many people of their sense of security and dignity .
And that can have devastating consequences . We have to ask ourselves , why are drug addiction and suicide on the rise in parts of our country ?
That 's not just about economics . It 's about something deeper , that is connected to economics : a sense of dislocation , even a pessimism about whether America still holds anything for them or cares about them at all .
That 's why I 've pledged that in my first 100 days as President , we will make the biggest investment in new , good-paying jobs since World War II . We need more jobs you can support a family on , especially in places that have been left out and left behind from Coal Country to Indian Country to inner cities , to every place that 's been hollowed out when a factory closed or a mine shut down because everyone in America deserves that fair chance in the race of life ' that President Lincoln described .
Now , I realize that our politics have contributed to the sense of division many Americans feel right now .
And as someone in the middle of a hotly fought political campaign , I cannot stand here and claim that my words and actions haven't sometimes fueled the partisanship that often stands in the way of progress .
So I recognize I have to do better too . I 'm running for President with the belief that we need to face up to these challenges and fix them in order to become a stronger , fairer country .
And in times like these , we need a President who can help pull us together , not split us apart .
And that is why I believe Donald Trump is so dangerous .
His campaign is as divisive as any we have seen in our lifetimes .
It is built on stoking mistrust and pitting American against American .
It 's there in everything he says and everything he promises to do as President .
It 's there in how he wants to ban Muslims from coming to the United States , and toyed with creating a database to track Muslims in America .
It 's there in the way he demeans women , in his promotion of an anti-Semitic image pushed by neo-Nazis , and in the months that he spent trying to discredit the citizenship and legitimacy of our first black President .
Last night in an interview , he said that he understands systemic bias against black people because
and I quote even against me , the system is rigged ' unquote .
He went on to say , I can relate to it very much myself . '
Even this the killing of people is somehow all about him .
It 's there in his proposals on immigration . He says he 'll round up 11 million people and kick them out .
He 's actually described a special deportation force that would go around America , pulling people out of their homes and workplaces , pulling children out of school .
I got a letter from a mother the other day who said her adopted son asked her with a shaky voice if President Trump would send him back to Ethiopia .
When kids are scared by political candidates and policy debates , it 's a sign something has gone badly wrong .
And we see it in the violence that Donald Trump encouraged toward protesters at his rallies , and the strange things he has said about the violence that will occur if we don't elect him .
He says that if he doesn't win this November , we and again I quote
won't even have a country anymore , ' America 's not going to continue to survive . '
I do not know what he 's talking about . But I do know we don't need that kind of fear-mongering not now , not ever .
And he 's gone even further even than that . He has taken aim at some of our most cherished democratic values and institutions .
He wants to revoke the citizenship of 4 million Americans born in this country to immigrant parents , and eliminate the bedrock principle enshrined in the 14th Amendment that if you 're born in America , you 're a citizen of America .
He said that a distinguished American , born in Indiana , a judge can't be trusted to do his job because his parents were Mexican ; he called him a Mexican judge ' over and over again .
He knew that the judge had been born in Indiana .
But it was a cynical , calculated attempt to fan the flames of racial division .
And designed to undermine people 's faith in our judicial system .
Why would someone running for President want to do that ?
And even that 's not all . He says , as Commander-in-Chief , he would order our troops to commit war crimes , and insisted they would follow his orders , even though that goes against decades of military training and the military code .
He 's banished members of the press who have criticized him is there any doubt he would do the same as President ?
Imagine if he had not just Twitter and cable news to go after his critics and opponents , but also the IRS or for that matter , our entire military .
Given what we have seen and heard , do any of us think he 'd be restrained ?
And he has shown contempt for and ignorance of our Constitution .
Last week , he met with House Republicans in Washington to try to assuage their serious concerns about him .
One member asked whether he 'd protect Article I , which defines the separation of powers between Congress and the executive branch .
Here 's the answer he reportedly gave : I want to protect Article One , Article Two , Article Twelve . '
Well here 's the thing there is no Article Twelve not even close .
That was a serious question , from an elected representative , and he either didn't care enough to answer it seriously or he didn't know where to begin .
Even the most stalwart Republicans were alarmed by that . And well they , and we , should be .
The first thing a new President does is take an oath to protect and defend ' the Constitution .
To do that with any meaning , you 've got to know what 's in it .
And you 've got to respect what 's in it .
I do wish Donald Trump would listen to other people once in awhile .
He might actually learn something . But he 's made it clear that 's not his thing .
As he has said , he only listens to himself .
This man is the nominee of the Party of Lincoln .
We are watching it become the Party of Trump . And that 's not just a huge loss for our democracy it is a threat to it .
Because Donald Trump 's campaign adds up to an ugly , dangerous message to America .
A message that you should be afraid afraid of people whose ethnicity is different , or religious faith is different , or who were born in a different country or hold different political beliefs .
Make no mistake there are things to fear in this world , and we need to be clear-eyed about them .
But we are each other 's countrymen and women . We share this miraculous country .
This land and its heritage is yours , mine and everyone 's willing to pledge allegiance and understand the solemn responsibilities of American citizenship .
That 's what indivisible ' means that big word that every grade school student knows
that we 're in this together , even if that 's not always easy .
So let 's think better of each other . Let 's hold together in the face of our challenges not turn on each other or tear each other down .
Let 's put ourselves in the shoes of police officers , kissing their kids and spouses goodbye every day and heading off to a dangerous job we need them to do .
Let 's put ourselves in the shoes of African Americans and Latinos , and try as best we can to imagine what it would be like if we had to have the talk ' with our kids about how carefully they need to act because the slightest wrong move could get them hurt or killed .
And yes , let 's put ourselves in the shoes of Donald Trump 's supporters .
We may disagree on the causes and the solutions to the challenges we face
but I believe like anyone else , they 're trying to figure out their place in a fast-changing America .
They want to know how to make a good living and how to give their kids better futures and opportunities .
That 's why we 've got to reclaim the promise of America for all our people no matter who they vote for .
And let 's be more than allies to each other .
Let 's take on each other 's struggles as our own .
My life 's work is built on the conviction that we are stronger together .
Not separated into factions or sides . Not shouting over each other , but together .
Our economy is stronger when everyone contributes to it , and everyone can benefit from the work they do .
Our communities are stronger when we all pull together to solve our problems and restore our faith in each other , and by doing so in the promise of America .
Our country is stronger when we work with our friends and allies to promote peace , prosperity , and security around the world .
This is an idea that goes back to the founding of America , when 13 separate colonies found a way despite their differences to join together as one nation .
They knew they were not stronger on their own , and neither are we .
I 've had the great delight of seeing the musical Hamilton .
And I hope more people at least get a chance to listen to the score and to hear the words .
There 's a great song by the character playing George Washington who sings , History 's eyes are on us . '
That was true then , and that 's true today .
If we do this right , and if we have the hard conversations we need to have , we will become stronger still like steel tempered by fire .
Now don't get me wrong , fierce debates are part of who we are they started at my dinner table with my father , and have continued ever since .
It is who we are . You 're reminded of that when you read history , when you think about the Lincoln-Douglas Debates .
Debate over the right way forward . And sometimes we have to balance competing values like freedom and order , justice and security , these are complementary values of American life .
That isn't easy . Previous generations have had to overcome terrible challenges .
And no one more so than Abraham Lincoln . But in the end , if we do the work , we will cease to be divided .
We , in fact , will be indivisible with liberty and justice for all .
And we will remain in Lincoln 's words the last , best hope of earth .
Thank you all very much . Hello , NAACP ! It is so good to be here with all of you .
I want to start by thanking my longtime friend and colleague , my collaborator , and partner , and so many important causes ; Hazel Dukes is a treasure .
A treasure not only for New York , but for the NAACP and for our country .
Thank you so much dear Hazel . I want to thank your Chair , Rosyln Brock .
Thank you so much Madame Chair . Your President and CEO Cornell Brooks , and everyone here today , including all the elected officials who have already appeared before you and those who will be addressing you during this convention .
And I have to start by saying we all know about that other Convention happening up in Cleveland today .
Well , my opponent in this race may have a different view , but there 's nowhere I 'd rather be than right here with all of you .
For more than a century , you 've been on the frontlines , pushing America to become a better , fairer country .
You and your noble predecessors have marched , sat in , stood up and spoke out all to bring us closer to our founding ideals of equality for all .
And yes we have made progress , we see the results : in classrooms where children of all races learn side by side ; in boardrooms and break rooms , where workers of all backgrounds are able to earn a living and support their families ; at every level of government , where more and more the people we elect to represent America actually look like America .
And , of course , in the White House , with our wonderful President and First Lady and their daughters , Barack and Michelle Obama .
So as the President has said , and indeed , as he exemplified , we 've come a long way .
But you know and I know that we have so much further to go .
We were cruelly reminded of that with the tragic deaths of Alton Sterling and Philando Castile , two more black men killed by police incidents , this time in Louisiana and Minnesota .
And then in Dallas , five police officers killed while serving and protecting peaceful protestors , targeted because they were police .
And we saw it again just yesterday , when three police officers were shot in an apparent ambush in Baton Rouge .
This madness has to stop . Watching the news from Baton Rouge yesterday , my heart broke not just for those officers and their grieving families , but for all of us .
Because we have difficult , painful , important work ahead of us to repair the bonds between police and communities , and between and among each other .
We need one another to do this work . And we need leaders like the NAACP . We need police officers to help us do this work .
These murders threaten all of that . Killing police officers is a terrible crime .
That 's why our laws treat the murders of police so seriously because they represent the rule of law itself .
If you take aim at that , you take aim at all of us .
Anyone who does it and anyone who helps must be held accountable .
And as president , I will bring the full weight of the law to bear in making sure that those who kill a police officer are brought to justice .
There can be no justification . No looking the other way .
We all have to make sure and pray it ends .
The officers killed yesterday in Baton Rouge were named Montrell Jackson , Matthew Gerald , Brad Garafola .
When they died , they were responding to a call about a man with a gun .
How many families , how many more families , would pay the price if we didn't have brave men and women answering those calls ?
That 's why I 'm haunted by the images of what the officers were doing in Dallas when they died .
Protecting a peaceful march , talking with the protestors . Where would our democracy be without courageous people willing to do that ?
So we all need to be partners in making law enforcement as secure and effective as it needs to be .
That means investing in our police in training on the proper use of force , especially lethal force .
How to avoid using force to resolve incidents . Officer safety and wellness everything they need to do their jobs right and rebuild trust with their communities .
I 've said from the beginning of my campaign , that will be my priority as President .
Perhaps the best way to honor our police is to follow the lead of police departments across the country striving to do better .
The deaths of Alton and Philando drove home how urgently we need to make reforms to policing and criminal justice how we cannot rest until we root out implicit bias and stop the killings of African Americans .
Because there is , as you know so well , another hard truth at the heart of this complex matter .
Many African Americans fear the police . I can hear you , some of you in this room .
And today there are people all across America sick over what happened in Baton Rouge and in Dallas .
But also fearful that the murders of police officers mean that vital questions about police-community relations will go unanswered .
Now that is a reasonable fear isn't it ? All of this tells us very powerfully that something needs to change .
Many police officers across the country agree with that . There 's a real opportunity here for cooperation .
But that can only happen if we can build trust and accountability .
And let 's admit it . That gets harder every time someone else is killed .
So now is the time for all good people who agree that the senseless killings must end to stand up , speak out loudly and clearly .
I know that the NAACP , and so many of you individually , will do all you can to help our nation heal and start the work together to meet these challenges .
We must reform our criminal justice system because everyone is safer when there is respect for the law and when everyone is respected by the law .
And let 's admit it , there is clear evidence that African-Americans are disproportionately killed in police incidents than any other group .
And African-American men are far more likely to be stopped and searched by police , charged with crimes , and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men convicted of the same offenses .
These facts tell us something is profoundly wrong . We can't ignore that .
We can't wish it away . We have to make it right .
That means end-to-end reform in our criminal justice system not half-measures , but a full commitment with real follow through .
That 's why the very first speech I gave in this campaign , back in April of 2015 was about criminal justice reform .
And the next President should make a commitment to fight for the reforms we so desperately need .
Holding police departments like Ferguson accountable . Requiring accurate data on in-custody deaths , like Sandra Bland .
Creating clear , national guidelines on the use of force , especially legal force .
Supporting independent investigations of fateful encounters with the police . So I pledge to you , I will start taking action on day one and every day after that until we get this done .
And you know what ? When the 24-hour news cycle moves on , I won't .
This is too important . This goes to the heart of who we are .
This is about our character as Americans . That 's why we also need to fix the crisis of mass incarceration .
Eliminate the disparity in sentencing between crack and powder cocaine .
Dismantle the school-to-prison pipeline that starts in school and diverts too many African American kids out of school and into the criminal justice system , instead of giving them the education they deserve to have .
And we need to do , all of us need to do
and I look forward to working with the NAACP we need to do a much better job of helping people who 've paid their debt to society find jobs and support when they get out .
America is well known , and we want to be a land of second chances but so many Americans never had a first chance to begin with .
So let 's give everyone a fair chance at rebuilding their lives .
As Abraham Lincoln said , Give everyone a fair chance in the race of life .
My plan would make significant investments in reentry programs for the formerly incarcerated .
And I will Ban the box in the federal government .
People deserve a real shot at an interview instead of being told
No , right out of the gate . Then beyond criminal justice , we must , we must fight for commonsense reforms to stop gun violence .
This is by far , gun violence , by far the leading cause of death for young African-American men , outstripping the next nine causes of death combined .
The wrong people , the wrong people keep getting their hands on guns .
And not just any guns military weapons , like the kind the Dallas shooter had , which allowed him to outgun the police .
That 's why the Cleveland police , yesterday , demanded that the state suspend open carry of guns on the streets during the Republican National Convention .
And last week , the extraordinary and inspiring Dallas police chief , Chief Brown , told lawmakers ,
Do your job . We 're doing ours , he said .
He 's right . When he went on to say we 're putting our lives on the line .
We 've got to do better . People who should care about protecting of police officers should be committed to getting assault weapons off the streets to start with .
And they should join us in instituting comprehensive background checks because law enforcement officers are nearly 50 percent , nearly 50 percent , less likely to be killed in states where there are checks on the purchase of handguns .
But even if we succeed in passing these laws and implementing them , we 've got to go even further than that .
We need to do something about the racial inequities in our healthcare system .
Right now , black kids are 500 percent more likely to die from asthma than white kids 500 percent !
Right now a black baby in South Carolina is twice as likely to die before her first birthday as a white baby .
Imagine if those numbers were reversed , and it were white kids dying .
Imagine the outcry and the resources that would flood in .
And let 's do everything we can to create more jobs in places where unemployment remains stubbornly high after generations of underinvestment and neglect .
I 'm a big fan of Congressman Jim Clyburn 's 10-20-30 plan steering 10 percent of federal investment to neighborhoods where 20 percent of the population has been living below the poverty line for 30 years .
That should go nationwide because the unemployment rate among young African Americans is twice as high as for young white people .
And because of that , my plan also includes $20 billion aimed specifically at creating jobs for young people .
If you don't get that first job , it 's hard to get the second job , and it 's hard to build that solid financial base .
And because of the Great Recession , the median wealth for black families is now just a tiny fraction of the median wealth for white families .
That 's why my plan includes steps to help more African-American families buy a home , which has always been one of the surest ways to build wealth and security for a family .
We will do more to support black entrepreneurs get access to capital .
And I want to give a shout out to black women , who represent the fastest-growing segment of women-owned businesses in America .
I want to unleash all of that energy and all of that talent .
We need to view all of these issues also as part of the struggle for civil rights .
Rosa Parks opened up every seat on the bus : our challenge now is to expand jobs so that everyone can afford the fare .
And let 's ensure that the bus route reaches every neighborhood , and connects every family with safe , affordable housing , good jobs , and quality schools .
Now , I know none of this will surprise those of you who know me .
I 've got a lot of plans . You can go to my website , Hillary-Clinton-dot-com and read our full agenda .
Because you see , I have this old-fashioned idea : if you 're running for President , you should say exactly what you want to do and how you will get it done .
I do sweat the specifics because I think they matter .
Whether one more kid gets health care , one more person finds a job , or one more woman entrepreneur gets access to capital to follow her dream those just may be details in Washington , but it really matters to those people and their families .
And the truth is , we need to plan because we face a complex set of economic , social and political challenges : they 're intersectional ; they 're reinforcing .
We 've got to take them all on . We can't wait and just do one at a time .
But the answers won't just come from Washington . Ending systemic racism requires contributions from all of us especially , especially those of us who haven't experienced it ourselves .
I 've been saying this for a while now and I 'm going to keep saying it , because I think it 's important .
We white Americans need to do a better job of listening when African Americans talk about the seen and unseen barriers you face every day .
We need to recognize our privilege and practice humility , rather than assume that our experiences are everyone 's experiences .
We all need to try , as best we can , to walk in one another 's shoes to imagine what it would be like to sit our son or daughter down and have the talk about how carefully they need to act around police because the slightest wrong move could get them hurt or even killed .
Let 's also put ourselves in the shoes of police officers , kissing their kids and spouses goodbye every day and heading off to do a dangerous job that their families pray will bring them home safe at night .
Empathy works both ways . We 've got to try to see the world through their eyes , too .
When you get right down to it , that 's what makes it possible for people from every background , every race , every religion , to come together as one nation .
It 's what makes our country endure . And in times like these we need a President who can help pull us together , not split us apart .
I will work every single day to do just that .
And what I 'm about to say , I say with no satisfaction , the Republican nominee for President will do the exact opposite .
He might say otherwise if he were here . But of course , he declined your invitation .
So all we can go on is what he has said and done in the past .
Donald Trump led the movement to de-legitimize our first black president , trumpeting the so-called birther movement .
Donald Trump plays coy with white supremacists . Donald insults Mexican immigrants , even an American judge born of Mexican heritage .
Donald Trump demeans women . Donald Trump wants to ban an entire religion from entering our country .
And Donald Trump loves to talk to the press . But let 's not forget , let us not forget : the first time Donald Trump was quoted in The New York Times was in 1973 , when the Justice Department went after his company for refusing to rent apartments to African Americans .
It was one of the largest federal cases of its kind at the time .
And when federal investigators spoke with Trump 's employees , they said they were instructed to mark rental applications from black people with a C . A C for colored .
By now , we 've heard a lot of troubling things about Donald Trump but that one 's shocking .
This man is the nominee of the Party of Lincoln .
And we are watching it become the Party of Trump .
And that 's not just a huge loss to our democracy
it is a threat to our democracy . And it all adds up , it all adds up to an undeniable conclusion : I don't care if you 're a Democrat , a Republican , an Independent Donald Trump cannot become President of the United States .
And that 's why we 've got to work together to get out the vote this fall .
You know that better than anyone . That 's why the theme of this conference is Our Lives Matter , Our Votes Count .
I agree with both of that . And now I think your votes count more than ever .
That 's why we 've got to stand up against any attempt to roll back the clock on voting rights .
Encourage everyone , everyone we know to stand up and be counted in this November election .
As Dr. King said , Our lives begin to end when we become silent about things that matter .
None of us , none of us , can afford to be silent with so much at stake .
That 's why , here today , I am pleased to announce a nationwide drive to get 3 million people to register to vote and to commit to vote in this election .
We are hosting more than 500 registration events this week , across the country .
We 're going to minor league baseball games , college campuses , barbershops , hair salons , street corners .
And with those we cannot connect with in person , we 've created an online , one stop shop registration tool , in English and in Spanish .
And my team in Ohio wanted me to make sure you all know that we 're hiring .
We actually have a recruiter here today he 's got a table set up in the hall .
We 're hiring paid organizers to help us get out the vote and get our message out all across Ohio .
So please spread the word we want great people on our team .
That 's the way we 're going to be successful .
We 're not the red team or the blue team , we 're the American team , and it 's time we start acting like it .
I have no doubt we can rise to meet these challenges if we stand together no doubt at all .
And if we are looking for inspiration , let 's go to one of the officers killed yesterday .
10 days ago , Montrell Jackson , a young African American police officer in Baton Rouge , posted a message on Facebook , he wrote so honestly and powerfully about the struggle of being black and wearing blue in today 's America .
I 'm tired , he wrote , in uniform I get nasty , hateful looks , and out of uniform , they consider me a threat .
He went on , These are trying times , please don't let hate infect your heart .
I 'm working in these streets , so any protesters , officers , friends , families , or whoever , if you see me , Montrell said , and need a hug , or want to say a prayer , I 've got you .
That , my friends , is the strength of America .
Men like Montrell Jackson . Despite all our challenges , that spirit of love and community must guide us still .
We have to heal the divides that remain , make the United States what it should be , stronger and fairer .
More opportunity for every one of our people . I would not be standing here on the brink of accepting the Democratic nomination if I did not believe , if I did not in my heart believe , that America 's best years are still ahead of us .
So let us go forward with faith , with confidence , with optimism .
Our children and our grandchildren deserve no less . Thank you , God bless you and God bless the United States of America .
Thank you so much Commander . Thank you , thank you so much .
Thank you very much Commander for that very warm welcome .
Thank you to your Executive Director , Bob Wallace your Commander-in-Chief , and all the men and women of the V.F.W. , of the auxiliary , for your commitment , your service , and your action on behalf of America 's veterans .
This is the 117th National Convention . That is a quite a legacy .
And in that time , the V.F.W. has built a record to be proud of .
You have been a moving force behind hallmark achievements : like the creation of the V.A. ; the passage of the G.I. Bill ; the establishment of national monuments dedicated to those who fought in World War II , the Korean War , the war in Vietnam , women in military service , and veterans disabled for life .
These monuments are sacred places . I 've been to many of them , also to our cemeteries around the world .
People come to sit quietly , maybe lay a flower or a letter or other memento .
To reflect on the courage and sacrifice of those who fought for our nation and our ideals .
I don't think it is an overstatement for me to say , those memorials might not exist if it weren't for you .
So thank you , and thank you for standing up today and every day for veterans ' health , for veterans ' education , for the right of all veterans to dignity and security .
And thank you for continuing to push our nation to live up to our obligations to those who serve .
I 've been a direct beneficiary of your expertise and commitment some of my top advisors are members of the V.F.W. I 'm grateful to all the veterans and retired military leaders who have shared their knowledge and counsel with me I especially want to thank the V.F.W. for the close consultation you provided as we work to put forth our plan to reform the VA .
Today I especially want to acknowledge and appreciate Retired Marine General John Allen , former Deputy Commander of U.S. Central Command and Commander of the International Security Assistance Force overseeing NATO troops in Afghanistan .
I had the great privilege of working with General Allen ; therefore , I am deeply honored that he endorsed me this morning .
His confidence in me and that of the other esteemed military leaders who support my campaign means a great deal to me .
But it also imposes a high responsibility on me as well .
So I thank you . I thank you for what you 've done behind the scenes , as well as in public , to make sure that America keeps our promises , honors our history , and gives our veterans the respect and the opportunities they 've earned .
A lot of the issues you have fought for are at stake in this election .
America is grappling with big questions : How do we keep our country safe ?
How do we make the world safer ? How do we make sure we give our troops what they need to see their missions through and when they come home , that they have the support and access to services they need to lead healthy , productive , successful lives ?
These challenges matter to me personally , not only as the proud daughter of a veteran .
My father , Hugh Rodham , enlisted in the Navy shortly after the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor .
He became a chief petty officer responsible for training thousands of young sailors before they shipped out to sea , mostly to the Pacific Theater .
After my father died in 1993 , I received letters and old photos from men who had served under him , talking about what a difference my dad made in their lives
these are letters that I treasure . My dad once told me how sad he felt when he left Great Lakes Naval Base and accompanied his trainees to the West Coast to join their ships .
He knew some of these bright , energetic young men wouldn't survive .
Some of them probably thought it too . But still , they went to serve .
Because they knew our country needed them . That 's the kind of courage and honor our men and women in uniform demonstrate every single day .
I thought a lot about my father 's experiences later , when I became a Senator from New York serving on the Senate Armed Services Committee , and then as Secretary of State .
I 've worked hard over the years on many of the issues you care about and work on every day .
I am not a newcomer to these issues . And today , I want to tell you a few of my core beliefs , which will guide me if I have the great honor to be elected this fall .
Because Americans aren't just choosing a President we 're also choosing a Commander-in-Chief .
The person who decides questions of war and peace , life and death .
There 's no more solemn or serious a responsibility than that .
So you deserve to know what we candidates believe about national security , and how we 'd go about making life-or-death calls .
Because they will affect our men and women in uniform , first and foremost .
And they will affect our veterans . Let 's start here
I believe the United States of America is an exceptional nation , with capabilities that no other country comes close to matching .
And we have the world 's greatest military don't let anyone tell you otherwise .
We also have an economy that is larger , more durable and more entrepreneurial than any other on the planet .
And we are guided by values that have long inspired people across the world a commitment to freedom and equality , justice and diversity that fundamental American idea that every single person deserves to be treated decently and with respect , no matter who they are .
I believe in standing with our allies because they are part of what makes us exceptional .
No country in the world has relationships like we do .
Generations of American troops fought , and yes , died to secure those bonds , because they knew we were safer with more friends and partners and fewer adversaries and enemies .
Our men and women in uniform carry that work forward today .
My running mate in this election is a wonderful man from Virginia named Tim Kaine .
He 's a U.S. Senator , he was governor of Virginia , mayor of Richmond , Virginia .
If you 're not familiar with him yet , I urge you to check him out .
He 's a great public servant and a terrific guy .
His son is a Marine . His son is actually deploying today to help defend our NATO allies in Europe .
That 's how committed he is and many others are to our alliances , and we should be , too .
After all , America 's word has to mean something .
I believe in being firm but wise with our rivals finding common ground where we can , and standing our ground when we must .
That 's the balance that made it possible for me to work with all kinds of nations : to work to increase pressure on North Korea ; to work to stand up to the Chinese in the South China Sea ; to work with Russia to conclude the new START treaty that reduces nuclear stockpiles , while standing up to them because of their threats to our friends in Eastern Europe .
One thing for certain you will not ever hear me is praise for dictators and strongmen who have no love for America .
And yes , I believe with all my heart in democracy .
And I believe in diplomacy . It 's often the only way to avoid conflicts that can end up exacting a much greater cost .
I believe the most sacred responsibility of a Commander-in-Chief is deciding whether to send men and women into battle .
I have visited our troops in theaters of war and tension .
I know how serious this is . Force must only be used as a last resort , and only with a clear and well-thought-out strategy .
Our troops deserve nothing less ; America expects nothing less .
I believe our troops strive to comport themselves with honor .
They deserve a Commander-in-Chief who will never order them to commit war crimes .
I believe in listening to our generals and admirals , because they have invaluable knowledge and experience , and they 're doing one of the most important jobs there is : commanding America 's sons and daughters .
As Commander-in-Chief , I will always show them respect and hear them out .
You will never hear me say that I only listen to myself on national security .
I believe in doing everything we can to meet threats at home and abroad .
I know we live in a dangerous world . That 's why we need real plans , real strategies , to deal with terrorism , including homegrown terrorism .
I 've worked with experienced people from across different fields , and indeed across the political spectrum , to come up with comprehensive strategies for these and other threats .
I will be ready to get to work on Day One
I take nothing more seriously than our security . Most of all , I believe in American leadership .
I believe that who we are as a people , the values that we hold dear , the history that we care about , matters a great deal .
I 'm not interested in talking provocatively ; I 'm not interested in insulting people , including our military ; I 'm interested in bringing our country together I 'm interested in healing the divisions .
We have to protect ourselves against terrorists . To do that , we need to lead other countries in stopping ISIS , al Qaeda , and other radical jihadist groups .
We shouldn't leave that to the rest of the world to figure out on their own that won't keep us safe .
We need a strong global economy , because it 's good for American jobs and exports .
That means we should lead in setting and enforcing the rules .
If we retreat on either security or the economy , behind some kind of imaginary wall , we will have lost our leadership , our purpose , our chance to prevail in the 21st Century .
Because if America doesn't lead , we leave a vacuum and that will either cause chaos , or enable other countries to rush in to fill that void .
Then they will be the ones making the decisions about American lives , jobs and safety .
The choices , make no mistake about it , might not be to our benefit .
That 's not an outcome we can live with . I have set forth plans and strategies for dealing with these threats .
I know how challenging it will be to meet the difficulties that we face in the world today .
But you see , I have confidence . I have optimism .
I don't understand people who trash talk about America who talk about us as being in decline , who act as though we are not yet the greatest country that has ever been created on the face of the earth for all of history .
If you want somebody who will scapegoat other people , peddle fear , and smear , I 'm not your candidate .
I 'm interested in bringing everybody together , rolling up our sleeves , and getting to work to solve our problems .
That 's why , in the Senate , I worked closely with Republicans .
Now as some of you might know , I have been the recipient of numerous political attacks for a very long time .
I 've learned to live with that . I have , as Eleanor Roosevelt advised many years ago ,
If a woman wants to be in a public arena , you 've better develop skin as thick as the hide of a rhinoceros . '
So when I got to the Senate , I didn't say ,
Oh , I 'm only going to talk to Democrats .
I 'm not going to work with Republicans . ' How silly would that be ?
I was elected to represent the great Empire State . And I wanted to do everything I could to produce results for the people who honored me by electing me to be their Senator .
So I worked with Republicans to increase the benefit paid to family members of the fallen ; to expand veterans ' access to military health insurance ; to make sure that all members of the Reserves and National Guard , and their families , had access to Tricare military health benefits even when they were not deployed .
I introduced the Heroes at Home Act to establish new services for military members and veterans suffering from pos t-t raumatic stress and traumatic brain injuries .
I fought successfully in 2007 to amend the 2007 Defense Appropriation Act , to establish a training program for family caregivers helping their loved ones with TBI .
I did all of this because I had met so many wonderful people who were struggling , struggling because they lost a son , or a daughter , a mother , a father , a wife , or a husband .
Struggling because their loved one came home and didn't have the care that he or she needed .
They deserved more support from all of us , and I , fortunately , was in a position to advocate for them .
I joined forces with Senator John McCain to personally raise money for the Intrepid Fallen Heroes Fund , which helped build a state-of-the-art rehab facility in San Antonio to help our seriously wounded service members coming home from Iraq and Afghanistan .
And let me just say it was a pleasure to work with Senator McCain on that project and many others .
I believe that he , and all American prisoners of war , are heroes and deserve the respect that that entails .
As President , I will build on the work I 've done .
We 're going to have a 21st Century Department of Veterans Affairs that delivers world-class care .
Like you , I was outraged by the V.A. scandals people waiting months , even years for things like wheelchairs and basic medication some even dying while languishing on a waitlist for an appointment .
Heartbreaking and absolutely unacceptable . That 's why I have put forth a detailed plan about what I would do as President to revamp the V.A. it will be one of my highest priorities .
But I will tell you this : we are not going to privatize the V.A. , we are going to reform it and make it work for every single veteran in America .
We will ensure access to timely , quality care ; improve the coordination of care , which as you know is a huge problem still ; improve care for women veterans , who are often under-served ; tackle and at long last , end the epidemic of veteran suicides by expanding access to mental health care , erasing the stigma that still prevents too many from getting the help they need .
I know this is a high priority for the V.F.W. and other veterans service organizations .
And I will do everything in my power to support you in this critical work .
And we 're going to help more veterans looking for jobs with expanded tax credits for businesses that hire veterans , more support to veterans who want to start their own businesses , better certification and credentialing programs , so the work that veterans did on active duty will be understood and respected as they compete for the jobs in the civilian sector that they deserve to be considered for and hired to perform .
And I 'm going to crack down on companies that prey on or discriminate against veterans .
They should be ashamed of themselves , and we are going to hold them accountable .
We will also follow the lead of cities like New Orleans , Houston , Philadelphia , and Las Vegas , which have worked to end veteran homelessness .
We have lessons to learn from them . Many more cities are making strong progress toward that same goal
we should support them , and end the tragedy of veteran homelessness once and for all .
And I will protect , preserve and defend the post-9/11 G.I. Bill .
It has opened doors of opportunity to more than one million veterans and family members .
Unfortunately , there are some Republicans in Congress chipping away at it .
That 's not just wrong it is short-sighted . This program helps us recruit and retain the all-volunteer force we need to protect our country .
And it 's a way to invest in families and our shared future .
We should protect and strengthen it , not let anyone erode it .
So yes , I have a plan to do all this and more .
Including supporting military spouses as they seek to build careers .
Including standing with women , standing with LGBT veterans to make sure they get the support they 've earned .
You can go to my website , and I hope you will , hillaryclinton.com, and read all the details .
I hope you will , not only because I want you to know , but there 's a lot of expertise in this room .
I want your ideas too . I have this old-fashioned notion : you run for President , you should tell people what you want to do , as specifically as possible .
So they can actually make up their minds . And then you should be held accountable as to whether or not you deliver results .
So here 's my bottom line . This is something that I care deeply about .
But I know a lot of veterans still feel invisible , powerless , like their country has forgotten them .
That is just totally wrong . It 's unacceptable , and we have to work together to make sure we end that .
We can disagree about the details . I 'm sure we will from time to time .
You see I actually believe as someone who 's been in public life and public service , it 's better if we have honest , candid conversations .
That 's the best way in a democracy for us to come up with the best solutions .
But we should be guided by our values . We can all agree that our troops deserve serious , strategic leadership .
We can all agree we have to be serious and committed about the complexity of the challenges we face , here at home and around the world .
Beneath whatever disagreements we might have as a country about how to get where we need to go , surely we can start listening to one another again .
Respecting one another , our individual experiences that bring so much to the debate .
My father made sure I understood that the freedoms and rights we enjoy as Americans didn't come out of thin air .
People sacrificed for them . Fought , bled and died for them .
People like you , and the generations of soldiers , sailors , airmen , Marines and Coast Guardsmen who have made our country strong , proud and free .
All of you , everyone who has served deserve our thanks , and more importantly , our respect .
You deserve a country and a president and a commander-in-chief who honor your service .
Not just with words but with deeds . That 's what the V.F.W. has stood for .
To make sure that America lives up to that standard .
And as President , I will be working alongside you as I did as Senator to make sure that we produce results .
I know this is the first time that one of our two major parties has ever nominated a woman .
And I know , that it takes a little getting used to , even for me .
But here 's what I want you to know . I will get up every single day in the White House , doing everything I possibly can to protect our country , to treat our men and women in uniform with the care , and concern and respect they deserve .
To make good on our nation 's promises to our veterans .
That 's how I was raised , that 's what I have done , and I promise you that 's what I will do .
Thank you , V.F.W. God bless you . And God bless the United States of America .
Thank you all very much Wow , it is so great being here with all of you today .
Thank you . I love you all too . I am so glad to see you gathered here .
I want to thank your President , Roger Rocha , and your Executive Director , Brent Wilkes , and let 's give another round of applause to Lizeth for sharing her story .
I believe that more people in our country need to hear from Lizeth and other DREAMers across America .
These young people are so important to our future . I told her I was really proud of her and I 'm sure that her family and her parents in particular are very proud as well .
And thank all of you for helping to make LULAC the united and energized organization it is today .
For 87 years , you have been on the frontlines .
Now I haven't been around all of those 87 years , but I am proud to stand alongside you for part of that journey .
There are a lot of people I know in this audience : people who have served as President and officers at LULAC , women who have led the women 's movement here out of LULAC .
Back in the ' 90s , we worked together to achieve universal health care .
We fought the good fight . And when were defeated , we got right back up , and you helped us pass the Children 's Health Insurance Program that covers 8 million children in America today .
I remember this very well because I worked with your leadership .
Back then , LULAC made signs that read , Let 's move forward with Clinton . '
Now , I found that very flattering . But I asked back then if we could please change the signs to
Let 's move forward together . ' Because that was more accurate .
Because everything we achieved , we achieved together . And that 's how we 're going to write the next chapter of the American story , to put opportunity within reach of every family .
We are going to do that together . And I for one , want , I want all Americans , from all backgrounds , to help chart that future .
And I hope and expect that Latinos will play a leading role .
Now you know this , but it bears repeating , you represent one of the fastest growing minority groups in America .
By 2050 , communities of color will represent the majority of our population .
So of course Latinos have to help us shape the future of America because you are the future of America .
Now I know from my own work going back decades that when we invest in this community when we make it easier for Latinos to get an education , compete for jobs , start and grow new businesses and pursue your dreams all of America benefits .
That 's why I 'm making to you two commitments for what I 'll do in the first 100 days of my Administration .
First , we will make the biggest investment in new , good-paying jobs since World War II with support specifically for Latin o-o wned small businesses .
And I will also introduce legislation for comprehensive immigration reform that includes a path to citizenship .
These two top priorities are what I have heard as I have traveled across the country , meeting with groups large and small .
People who say , Hey we want to succeed , we want to start a small business , we want to create more opportunity . '
And we need once and for all to end the vicious debate about comprehensive immigration reform .
So first , with respect to jobs . We need to create an economy that works for everyone , not just those at the top .
And we have to do this together as well . You know that better than anyone .
Latinos are 17 percent of our country 's population but you hold only 2 percent of its wealth .
There 's a disconnect here . We 've got to connect more Latinos with good jobs that pay good wages , with more opportunities to go to college , like Lizeth , to launch new ventures , and build wealth that you can pass on to your kids .
Now , there are lots of ways of doing that , aren't there ?
Well , one of the best ways is to face the fact that America 's infrastructure is crumbling .
We need to rebuild . And we need to build our clean energy infrastructure , so we can increase efficiency , cut costs for consumers , and compete and win in the 21st-century green economy .
It just so happens that more than a quarter of all construction jobs in America are held by Latinos .
My plan will create thousands more jobs in these sectors , putting people to work rebuilding America .
That is about the kind of future that we want together .
And I have a special place in my heart for small businesses .
My dad was a small businessman , very small . But he worked so hard and gave us a very solid , middle class life .
So I want to do more to support Latin o-o wned small businesses , which have created so many jobs and so much growth across America .
I have a plan to cut red tape , increase access to capital , and invest $25 billion to support innovation in communities that need that the most .
That 's what we will do together . While we 're doing all that , creating these jobs , which is good for everybody in America .
While we 're at it , let 's finally give workers a raise .
It 's time to raise the minimum wage . No one who works full-time in America should ever live in poverty .
The presumptive Republican nominee doesn't believe we need to raise the minimum wage .
In fact he has said wages are too high in America .
Yes , exactly . And you know what else we need to do ?
We need to close the gender pay gap . This inequality of pay affects all women , but it is hardest on women of color .
And hardest most of all on Latinas . On average , Latinas earn just 55 cents for every dollar earned by a white man .
That is just outrageous . I know you understand this , and I am going to campaign on this across America in front of every audience .
Because one of the fastest ways to raise income is to ensure equal pay .
And people who say to me , Well that 's a woman 's issue ' are missing the whole point .
If you have a mother , a wife , a sister , or a daughter who is not being paid fairly , it 's your issue , it 's a family issue and it 's an American economic issue .
And at a time when education is more important than ever , let 's make sure no one is forced to give up their dream of going to college because they can't afford to pay .
Over the last 20 years the number of Latinas going to college has tripled .
We should applaud , that is a big accomplishment . Yet here is the catch , Latinos are still less likely than their white peers to graduate , often because they can't afford to .
That 's heartbreaking , isn't it ? I think we 've gone backwards in many ways .
We don't provide enough help to students who really need it .
My plan will change that . We 're going to make community college free .
And we 're going to make public universities debt free .
Now here 's what that means . For families making less than $ 125,000 a year , we will eliminate tuition altogether at public colleges and universities .
We will also help those of you who already have debt refinance it and pay it back with more help .
Now , also , in my first 100 days , as part of my commitment , I will introduce comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship .
I want to say I know how painful it was when the Supreme Court made the decision it made .
So many families had hoped that it would be different .
And there is a lot of worry and concern across our country .
So let me say this . We do , in my opinion , have a consensus that something must be done .
Whether we get it done will depend on this election .
For a long time the question of whether to reform our immigration system was hotly contested .
Now there 's greater agreement , except in some circles .
I deeply regret the kind of campaign the presumptive Republican nominee started with and is still running today .
So part of what we have to be strong in standing for is a credible path forward for reform that is truly comprehensive , addressing all aspects of the system , including immigrants living here today , those who wish to come in the days ahead , from highly-skilled workers to family members , to those seeking refuge from violence , wherever that might occur .
To families , this is an issue that matters more than we can measure .
So there 's nothing that I take more seriously . I will send a proposal to Congress that will include a path to citizenship .
That will fix the family visa backlog and strengthen our economy .
And will enable our country to be what it 's always been a place where people from around the world can come to start new businesses , pursue their dreams , apply their talents to American growth and innovation .
And while we 're doing that , we must do everything we can to keep families already here together .
So when the Supreme Court put DAPA on hold , and that affected 5 million immigrants , and it was devastating for millions of families .
But it 's important to note the Court did not actually rule on the substance of the case .
I 've said throughout this campaign that DAPA is squarely within the President 's authority .
And I will keep saying that and fighting for it .
There 's more we can do . We need a simple , straightforward system where people with sympathetic cases or can show a history of service to their communities can make their case , and be eligible for deferred action .
Like people who experience and report extreme labor abuses . And we absolutely must end family detention , close private detention facilities , stop the raids and round-ups .
These actions are not consistent with our values . Too many children in our country say goodbye to their parents every morning , not knowing if Mom or Dad will be there when they get home .
I know how important family is , and I want to do everything I can as President to keep families together .
That 's one of the many reasons to finally get immigration reform through .
There 's nothing more important to these families that live in fear and anxiety .
Now jobs and immigration reform are just two of the issues that are at stake in this election .
What happens this November really matters my friends . Now , I think that 's true in every Presidential election .
But this one is different , isn't it ? We 're not just choosing a President and Commander in Chief this fall .
The choice we make will say a lot about who we are and whether we understand and celebrate the diversity in our country , which makes us all the stronger .
After the last election , the Republicans commissioned a major report , telling them everything they did wrong and what they 'd need to do in order to win next time .
One of the conclusions of that report was that Republicans had to work harder to appeal to Latino voters .
Next week in Cleveland , they will nominate someone who thinks
Latino outreach ' is tweeting a picture of a taco bowl .
What a difference a few years makes . Donald Trump is temperamentally unfit to be President of the United States .
Let 's just remember why that is so . In the first weeks of his campaign , he said that immigrants from Mexico are drug dealers , rapists , murderers , carriers of infectious disease .
He referred to a Latina contestant in his Miss Universe pageant as Miss Housekeeping . '
He insists and I quote this is a country where we speak English , not Spanish . '
Well I have to tell you he doesn't know much about our history and what a great opportunity we give to people from everywhere to come to this country .
He criticized Jeb Bush for speaking quote Mexican . '
You can't make this up . He wants to revoke the citizenship of 4 million Americans born in this country to immigrant parents , eliminate the bedrock principle in the 14th Amendment of the Constitution that if you 're born in America , you 're a citizen of America .
Now , I don't know if you read about his visit recently to Capitol Hill to try to assuage the concerns of some of the House and Senate members .
But he was asked a serious question by one of those members what did he think about Article I of the Constitution and the powers that it described .
He said , I like Article 1 , Article II , Article XII . '
Well , there is no Article XII . I kind of have this old-fashioned idea that if you raise your hand to be sworn in as President to defend and protect the Constitution of the United States , you should know what is in the Constitution of the United States .
Now , I often mention the 11 million people he wants to round up and deport .
But if you add in the more than 4 million Americans whose citizenship he wants to revoke , it 's closer to 16 million .
Never mind that this crazy idea could cost us nearly a trillion dollars in economic output .
He is talking about undoing a fundamental value of our nation .
Then there are his attacks against Judge Curiel , the distinguished judge in the fraud lawsuit against the so-called Trump University .
Judge Curiel was born in Indiana . Last time I checked , it was part of the United States .
His parents were born in Mexico . So , as far as Donald 's concerned , that means Judge Curiel can't be trusted to do his job .
He says that the judge should be disqualified because of his , and I quote ,
Mexican heritage . ' Those are his words . He called him a Mexican judge ' over and over again .
It was a cynical , calculated attempt to fan the flames of racial division .
And also to undermine people 's faith in our judicial system .
Why would someone running for President want to do that ?
Even the Republican Speaker of the House , Paul Ryan , called Trump 's comments , the textbook definition of a racist comment . '
I will say what Donald Trump won't say . Judge Curiel is as American as I am .
And as American as Donald Trump is . So just listen closely because when Trump talks about making America great again , that is code for taking us back to a time when racial minorities , and women , were marginalized , ostracized , treated as less than the full citizens , the full participants , the full human beings that we are .
Now he 's making unfortunately , an impression on our children , too
or dad or teacher about how to talk to their kids about Trump .
In one recent survey , two-thirds of teachers reported that their students especially those from immigrant families feel afraid about what this election will mean for their futures .
When our kids are scared by our policy debates , that 's a sign something has gone badly off the rails .
It matters when at a high school sporting event in Indiana and Wisconsin , Latino teenagers are subjected to chants of Build the wall!'
And Speak English . ' Donald Trump is running the most divisive campaign of our lifetimes .
His message is that you should be afraid afraid of people whose ethnicity is different , whose religious faith is different , or who were born in a different country .
That 's , my friends , no innuendo or dog-whistle anymore .
It 's all out in the open now . So we have to come back twice as strong and twice as clear .
We have to say with one voice that Latinos are a vital part of the American community .
And we saw that so tragically again last week . When shots rang out in Dallas last week , brave police officers ran into the gunfire .
One of them was a man named Patrick Zamarripa . He was a Navy veteran .
He served three tours in Iraq . He had a 2-year old daughter .
And he was very proud of his Mexican heritage . On July 4th , in what would turn out to be his final tweet , this is what he wrote : Happy Birthday to the greatest country on the face of this planet .
My beloved America!' That is the Latino community . Loving .
Dedicated . Proud . Patriotic . Whether you 're Mexican , Puerto Rican , Cuban , Afro-Latino , from Central or South America , whether your family just arrived or has been here since before the United States even existed , we are brothers and sisters , and I will be your champion .
We are not strangers . You are not intruders . You 're our neighbors , our colleagues , our friends , our families .
You make our nation stronger , smarter , and more creative .
I want you to know I see you , I hear you , and I am with you .
And together , together we must send a resounding message to Donald Trump in November and earn a decisive mandate against demagoguery and fear .
It 's not enough to just complain , it 's not enough to talk to friends and neighbors or make speeches .
We need to inspire a level of turnout that will help us win up and down the ticket .
That will lead to more supportive state and local officials , who can put a stop to aggressive , anti-immigration measures .
That will lead to more Senators and Representatives helping us craft immigration reform , and a Congress that will actually pass it .
So I 'm going to work my heart out , but I need your help .
I need you at my side . Because this is your election .
That 's why the work that LULAC is doing to help register voters is so critical .
That 's why I 'm fighting for automatic voter registration .
When you leave this conference please go home and figure out what you can do to be a part of the LULAC registration movement .
Let 's move forward together once more , toward a future built on the kindness and compassion ' that Cesar Chavez envisioned , toward the social change ' that Dolores Huerta marched for , toward a future that reflects that simple , timeless notion that all of us are equal .
Judge Curiel is an American . Patrick Zamarripa was an American .
Lizeth is an American . We are all proud Americans .
And the promise of America is big enough for all of us .
Let 's go forth and make that clear in the election of 2016 .
Thank you . God bless you ! Thank you , Tampa !
Thank you all . Thank you so much . Whoa .
Are we ready to go win an election in November ?
Well , I think after the last week , what we saw in Cleveland , we 'd better be ready to go win an election in November .
I want to thank Delia for those wonderful words about her life growing up here in Tampa and her strong endorsement .
I want to thank my longtime friend and my colleague from the Senate , your Senator Bill Nelson .
I also want to thank your great mayor , Mayor Bob Buckhorn .
I also have a few others to thank , because I 'm thrilled to have so many strong Florida leaders here with us today
County Commissioner Les Miller ; former Governor and soon-to-be congressman Charlie Crist ; former Mayor Sandy Freedman ; and we 've got a great group of state representatives , councilmembers , and so many more , and I am grateful to each and every one of you who are here with us .
I 've got to tell you , did any of you watch that convention in Cleveland ?
Well , it was kind of perversely flattering . It 's hard to believe they spent so much time talking about me and no time talking about jobs or education or health care .
No matter what your political leanings , I think we can all agree that never in the history of conventions , certainly , but I think even more broadly , have we moved forward together by pointing fingers and scapegoating and blaming people instead of rolling up our sleeves , getting a plan together , and then working to achieve it .
Now , I mean , something has gone terribly wrong when one speaker says
vote your conscience ' and gets booed . I mean , I never thought I would say these words , but Ted Cruz was right .
In this election , do the right thing and vote your conscience vote for your future ; vote for a United States of America .
Now , look , I think many of us felt that those speakers , including of course their nominee , were not talking about the country we know and love .
They weren't talking about the work people do every day , the opportunities we try to seize , neighbors helping neighbors .
I didn't hear any of that . Instead , I heard about Donald Trump 's dark and divisive vision .
Last night 's speech took it to a whole new level .
He offered a lot of fear and anger and resentment , but no solutions about anything that he even talked about .
He didn't have a jobs program , did he ? All that talk about keeping people safe ; I didn't hear any plans about what he 's going to do to support our police , to make sure that we are all working together .
You could listen to that speech and you could think , my goodness , he believes America is in decline .
And I 've got to say , as he said this last night , I was pretty shocked .
He said , I alone can fix it . '
Now , just think about that for a minute , because it 's really important .
His vision of America is one where we Americans are kind of helpless , we need to be rescued .
I can't really imagine him on a white horse , but that seems to be what he 's telling us :
I alone can fix it . ' Well , he doesn't understand that Americans , we Americans , we are strong , big-hearted , results-oriented , generous people in America .
I 've spent a lot of time , a lot of wonderful times , traveling across our country , and I 've seen people fixing all kinds of things .
I 've met educators like Delia , working with teachers and parents to turn around schools and give kids a better chance .
I 've met small businesses and entrepreneurs who get up every day and work really hard .
And you know when they make a contract for their goods or their services , they expect to be paid .
I 've met so many wonderful men and women who serve in our military ; they know their job , they know the grave responsibility that they fulfill , and they get up every day and they do their best .
But I 've never heard one of them say ,
Oh , I can fix it alone . ' I was in Orlando before I came here to Tampa .
And I had the great honor of sitting and talking with some of the residents of that beautiful city , and hearing what they are doing together to deal with the aftermath of the worst mass shooting in American history .
The mayor spoke with great pride about how his city had responded .
The police captain in charge of the SWAT team talked with such conviction about how when the moment arrived , the police in Orlando were ready .
They had trained . They supported each other . They were ready .
The captain didn't say , I can fix it alone . '
He said , I 'm a member of a team the best team that anybody could have . '
I met some of the hospital and the medical personnel who were there to take the wounded and worked so heroically to save lives , every one of them doing his or her part triage , nursing doing everything .
I didn't meet any one of them who said ,
Hey , I can fix it alone . ' I 've never heard of an American leader , or at least someone who wants to be an American leader , claiming that he 's all we need .
That 's not a democracy , my friends . As I recall , we had a revolution to make sure we didn't have someone who said , I can fix it alone . '
The other thing he said that really shocked me it is hard to know where to start , isn't it ?
Well , last night Donald told us , I am your voice . '
Well , I don't think he speaks for most Americans , do you ?
He doesn't speak for small businesses like the ones he has consistently stiffed and driven into bankruptcy and financial peril .
He doesn't speak for the workmen that he 's employed on his various projects and then refused to pay them .
He doesn't speak for the housekeepers and the cooks and everybody working at a hotel in Las Vegas that he owns that have voted to have a union and he refuses to even talk to them .
He doesn't speak for immigrants ; he only speaks against immigrants .
He doesn't speak for people with disabilities . He doesn't speak for our military , which he has insulted consistently , and in particular , prisoners of war who sacrifice much of their life because they serve us .
And contrary to what they tried to say at their convention , I don't think he speaks for women .
I don't think he speaks for working families who would be devastated by his reckless economic policies .
He doesn't speak for anyone who thinks our country should be standing together not splintering apart .
He sure doesn't speak for me , because I know we are stronger together and that 's what we 're going to be next year .
Now , starting on Monday in Philadelphia , we will offer a very different vision .
It 's about building bridges , not walls , between people .
It 's about making the economy work for everyone not just those at the top .
It 's about embracing our diversity that does make our country great .
I have to tell you , in Orlando today , in listening to people who had been there that night , meeting a mother whose son died , meeting others who barely escaped after hiding from the killer , sitting around a table with leaders of the LGBT community , leader of the SWAT team , a county commissioner , and a Muslim imam who has been embracing the LGBT community , I was so proud , I was so proud .
But well , I 'm proud of everybody in this country who gets up every day and makes a contribution and does your part .
And what the folks in Orlando said to me was so touching .
They said , We have to stand against hatred no matter who it 's against ' racial hatred , religious hatred , homophobia , xenophobia all of these hates that infect the soul .
And we have to stand against violence everywhere , and that includes standing up for common sense gun safety measures .
I want to say something else , I really do , because this is serious to me .
I love this country . I am so grateful for all the opportunities and blessings I 've had , and I am so humbled by the prospect of being nominated next week in Philadelphia .
But here 's what I want you to hear : I will do everything I can to make life better for hardworking Americans .
I will do everything I can to bring people together .
I will do everything I can to keep us safe , and I know a little bit about that .
Now , you can't put this you can't really put this into law is what I 'm about to say , but we need more love and kindness in this country .
We need more respect between and among our fellow Americans .
We need to be listening more to each other . The last thing we need are leaders who try to divide us even more than we are .
We should be working to reach out to those who are different from us .
Our differences , which make up our diversity , makes the United States the strongest , best positioned country in the world for the 21st century .
I am proud to be an American , and I want to be sure that our children and our grandchildren have the same pride and the same opportunity to have the access to the American dream that so many of us have had so that they too can enjoy the fruits of freedom and liberty , justice and equality and opportunity .
Now , look , I understand that there is a constituency for the fear and the anger that we saw last week .
I know there are people who are feeling insecure and anxious about their lives , about their futures .
They worry that maybe they 're not going to have as a high a standard of living as their parents or grandparents or as they themselves hoped .
I know that there 's a lot of angst about all the changes that are happening in the world technology , globalization .
I understand all that . And I respect those who have legitimate concerns and questions .
But I 've never known America to quit on ourselves .
I 've never known us to give up in the face of tough challenges .
I 've never known us to basically retreat into the kind of isolationism that was being advertised at their convention .
That is not who we are . Those are not the values that made this a great country .
And don't ever forget : We are a great country already !
Now , can we do better ? Of course we can .
Can we be fairer ? Can we provide more ladders of opportunity ?
Yes , we can . And that 's exactly what I intend to do if I 'm given the great privilege of being your president .
I will work every single day to make your dreams come true , to make you believe that America 's future can be even better than our past .
We are a forward-looking nation , aren't we ? And I know that if we set our goals and we work to achieve them , we will .
It has always been thus . This country has always delivered for the American people .
Now , we 've had some challenging times . We 've taken some detours .
It took a long time for some people to be given the same rights as everybody else .
We know that . But there is no place on Earth that historically has continued to move forward towards that more perfect union .
The last thing we need is somebody running for president who talks trash about America .
So I hope you know that this campaign is really going to take a lot of work .
I hope you will join us . I hope you will take your phones out and text , join , ' J-O-I-N , 47246 , or go to my website , hillaryclinton.com, to get involved .
And I want to tell you this , especially the young and young at heart .
We are hiring organizers right here in Florida . If you would like to apply , go to that website .
We want the very most energetic , enthusiastic people because our success in the I-4 corridor is essential to our winning .
And I 'm excited about this campaign because I believe that when it 's all said and done , all of the scary speeches with all the side effects are over , people have stopped yelling at us at the top of their lungs like they did all week , that we will choose to be stronger together .
That 's what I 'm counting on . That 's what I , in my heart , believe , is the right course for our country .
It is the only course , the only course that leads us with confidence and optimism into the future .
And I know that we are up to the task .
I know we are . And particularly to all the young people who are here today , every election is always about the future .
This election is truly about your future . So today in Orlando , when I asked everybody around the table what they wanted , what they needed , they basically said ,
We need people to understand what we 've gone through , to be there for us for the long term , to help us help all those who were affected in all the families , and we need to stand up against hate and divisiveness . '
And the best way I can sum up what I hope this election will lead to the conclusion we will reach together in November and the work we will do for the next four years is it really is great to be among so many optimistic people but here 's what I here is what I want you to remember .
My last thought for you today . Just remember , love trumps hate .
Good evening . What a great honor it is for me to be here with all of you , and to have a chance to see some of the mothers that I 've gotten to know over the last months and to meet others of you who are here for this weekend .
I think it 's fair to say that the program has already been amazing .
Just here during dinner and I know you had other sessions this weekend but here during dinner , I have to say that Rebecca Vaughns was just astonishing .
And Jill Tracey kept us all in line . I don't know if you could notice where you were sitting , but she has on the coolest-looking red tennis shoes underneath that elegant , long , flowing black dress .
And Queene Thompson Brown spoke to our hearts . Just unleash that , because you have a powerful message .
I want to thank La Vie . I want to thank Minister Wanda Johnson , and Pastor Gregory Williams , and Kat Tynes .
Kat Tynes has on the highest high heels I think I 've ever seen .
I was just knocked over when Kat came up here .
They sparkle , but they 're like a foot high .
I had to give up wearing high heels 10 years ago .
I am so jealous . But the sisterhood that is here is so overwhelming in its love , and I am grateful to see all of you and it in action .
I want to thank Sybrina and her entire family , who stand behind her , for bringing us together .
Trayvon 's parents , Sybrina and Mr. Tracy Martin , and his brother , Jahvaris , and his grandmother because as Sybrina said , she 's from a line of strong women , and I 've met Marion Evans , for the first time in South Carolina , and am happy to see her again tonight have demonstrated what it really means to have a family in the worst of times .
I appreciate the elected officials who are here , including my longtime friend , Congressman Alcee Hastings , who I 've known a long , long time .
And Barbara Jordan , and Dennis Moss , and Oliver Gilbert , and Dorothy Bendross Mindingall .
But most of all , I thank all the mothers and fathers , but mostly the circle of mothers , who are turning your grief into action , and so importantly , reaching out to support other parents who face the unimaginable .
I 've had the great privilege of getting to know Sybrina over the last months .
Even before I met her , I knew something important about her .
Like a lot of people , I watched I watched in disbelief and horror when her son was killed .
But then I saw her talking about her love for Trayvon , urging people who were devastated by his death to make America a more peaceful place .
She was joined by Trayvon 's father . I can remember seeing that on television .
One reporter described them as models of grace and fortitude .
When I met Sybrina for myself , that 's exactly what I saw .
It takes a special kind of person to endure a loss like all of you , and then find a way to turn it into service .
That 's what Sybrina has done . That 's what many of you have done .
Sybrina said , This is not something I ever wanted to do .
She said , I can't help Trayvon , but there are a lot of other Trayvon Martins I can help .
That 's true for all of us . There are a lot of other young men and young women we all can help .
You see , I believe we have a moral obligation to protect our children no matter what ZIP code they live in to reduce violence , especially gun violence .
To stand up against systemic racism and to promote justice and equality .
I believe we owe that to our children , and we owe it to the parents who love their children more than anything , especially those whose love persists after they were so tragically taken from them .
Sybrina and I were talking at the table about the weekend that has been provided for the mothers who are here , and I had the great honor of meeting each of the mothers , the Circle of Mothers , before we came in .
Some lost their children to gun violence . Others died after encounters with police , or because of domestic violence .
Each mother handed me a letter . Actually , they put it in a basket put it in a basket that Sybrina 's mother , I think , made possible .
They handed me that letter , and I 'm going to read every single word of these letters , because each of the mothers is telling us something that we all need to hear , not just about their tragedies , but about our country .
Something is wrong when so many young people just starting their lives are dying .
Something is wrong when so many Americans have reason to believe that our country doesn't consider their children as precious and worthy of protection as other children because of the color of their skins .
Something is wrong when so many parents live in fear that their child will be hurt or killed , just for being a young black man in a hooded sweatshirt , like Trayvon ; or listening to music in a car , like Jordan Davis , whose mother Lucy is here ; or for standing in a park with her friends , like Hadiya Pendleton , whose mother Cleo is here ; or simply going to first grade , like Ben Wheeler 's mother knows , a student at Sandy Hook Elementary Ben 's mother Francine is here too .
Something is very wrong , my friends . And this election gives us a chance to keep trying to make it right .
I come here tonight as a mother and a grandmother .
I love my daughter and my granddaughter more than anything , and I worry about them like every mother does .
I want them always to be safe . But I also come here as someone who 's been fighting for children my entire life .
And I 'm going to keep talking about these issues every chance I get , because there 's nothing more important than protecting our children .
If we fail at that , it really doesn't matter what else we get right .
So we have got to face up to all of the barriers that are denying children the opportunities they deserve , that enable people to see some children as less than what they truly are talented , beautiful , and beloved .
We 've got to dismantle the school-to-prison pipeline that wrongly diverts too many kids into the criminal justice system .
We 've even seen an uptick a significant uptick in police involvement in school discipline , especially in communities of color .
We 're seeing an overreliance on suspensions and expulsions . Some of you may remember that video of the girl in South Carolina being thrown out of her desk and dragged across her classroom floor by a school officer .
Classrooms should be safe places for all children . That should go without saying .
And yes , we need to continue to fight for criminal justice reform .
Our legal system is often stacked against those who have the least power and are the most vulnerable .
Let 's get back to that fundamental principle : everyone benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone is respected by the law .
And this is actually an area where a lot of Democrats and Republicans agree we need to end the era of mass incarceration ; rebuild the bonds of trust between law enforcement and communities ; and do something about the horror , the tragedy of too many young African Americans being killed by police or dying in custody .
The mothers of Dontre Hamilton and Eric Garner are here tonight .
They , along with Sandy Bland 's mother , and so many others across the country , are doing their part to make sure no one else 's children die like theirs did .
They deserve our complete and total support . And we need to protect the health of our children , and that includes their mental health .
Nearly 17 million children in America experience mental health problems .
Some of those kids don't get treatment . They grow up to adults , and then they cause harm to others .
We need to make sure the next generation grows up in a country where there 's no shame or stigma , no barriers to anyone seeking and needing mental health care .
And , at long last , we must do something about the gun violence that stalks communities and terrorizes families .
This is on the minds of every one of us here tonight as we remember all of the young people who have been lost .
This problem isn't going away . Even toddlers are getting their hands on guns and shooting themselves or someone else .
There have been , by last count , 23 cases of toddlers getting guns so far this year .
I don't know what more evidence anybody needs in our country to know that somebody has gone terribly wrong .
We are smart enough and strong enough as a nation to figure out how to protect the rights of responsible gun owners while keeping guns out of the hands of domestic abusers , other violent criminals , gang members , the severely mentally ill .
I know we can do this . And despite all the political noise , we are actually united on this issue .
The vast majority of Americans support comprehensive background checks . In fact , the conservative pollster Frank Luntz found that 82 percent of gun owners and 74 percent of NRA members support background checks for anyone buying a gun .
Democrats and Republicans overwhelmingly support them . So do leaders in law enforcement .
So this isn't a matter of building popular support . We already have it .
This is a matter of making elected officials do their jobs to keep our children safe .
Now , we know the gun lobby is powerful . I believe it 's the most powerful lobby in Washington .
And we know that some candidates will say or do anything to keep them happy .
Just yesterday at the NRA 's annual convention , Donald Trump said that in his very first hour as president , heaven forbid , he would overturn President Obama 's actions to strengthen background checks .
Remember , President Obama took those steps after the massacres at Mother Emanuel in Charleston and Sandy Hook Elementary in Newtown , Connecticut .
Then Mr. Trump went further . He said that also on his first day in office , he 'd mandate that every school in America allow guns in classrooms .
Every school , he said . That idea isn't just way out there , it 's dangerous .
33,000 people die from guns every year , nearly 3,000 children and teenagers among them .
Parents , teachers , and schools should have the right to keep guns out of classrooms , just like Donald Trump does at many of his hotels , by the way .
This is someone running to be president of the United States of America , a country facing a gun violence epidemic , and he 's talking about more guns in our schools .
He 's talking about more hatred and division in our streets , even about more nuclear weapons in the world .
That 's no way to keep us safe . If you want to imagine what Trump 's America will look like , picture more kids at risk of violence and bigotry .
Picture more anger and fear . Ask any of the mothers here tonight if they want to live in that kind of America .
Enough is enough . Unlike Donald Trump , I will not pander to the gun lobby .
And we will not be silenced . And we will not be intimidated .
As long as children anywhere are being killed by gun violence , we will keep fighting for our kids because they deserve a president who stands up for them and stands with the mothers here .
Their lives are valuable . Now , there 's a lot more I could say tonight about what we need to do to better serve our kids , from education to health care to jobs .
But here 's the bottom line : Anyone asking for your vote owes it to you to fully grapple with the real challenges facing our families and communities .
We owe it to you to listen and come up with solutions not scapegoats , solutions that would make a difference in your children 's lives .
And to the mothers and fathers who have lost children , we owe you our love , our support , our gratitude , and our promise that we will carry the memories of your sons and daughters in our hearts every day , just like you do .
One of the best experiences of this campaign for me has been getting to know Mothers of the Movement , Sybrina and so many of the other women here tonight .
They are turning their sorrow into a strategy and their mourning into a movement .
I 've had the opportunity to sit and listen as they talk about their kids and their families .
And I 've seen how you gain strength from each other .
That 's why tomorrow I hope you will take what you have gotten here this weekend back to your communities , to your families , to your loved ones , because it really does take a village .
It takes a village to raise a child , to protect a child , to mourn a child , and to honor a child .
So we 've got to stand together and lift each other up and draw strength from each other .
Running for president 's hard , I got to tell you .
But it 's nothing like what I have seen the mothers do and what I have learned from every one whom I have met .
Your courage and your commitment and your leadership is inspirational to me .
I want to close with a passage from Scripture that means a great deal to me , and I know has meant a great deal to Sybrina .
Trust in the Lord with all your heart , and lean not on your own understanding .
In all your ways submit to Him , and He will make your paths straight .
We may never , never be able to understand the senseless violence that has affected the lives in this room and so many others who you are standing for across our country .
But there is a path ahead of us . There is work for us to do .
And it is up to us to do that work , and to walk that path , with trust that progress is possible ; with love for all our children , no matter their race or background ; and with the memory of those we 've lost lighting our way toward the future every child in this country deserves .
I am here tonight to say thank you to this circle of mothers , and to say God bless you all and God bless your families .
Thank you so very much . In addition , she reiterated her commitment to introducing comprehensive immigration reform in the first 100 days in office and building on President Obama 's executive actions in order to keep families together .
Hillary also warned of the consequences of a Donald Trump presidency that would deport 11 million immigrants and tear hardworking families apart .
She emphasized that the stakes couldn't be higher because Donald Trump 's vision for America is to send a deportation force ' to schools , workplaces , and homes to round up children , mothers , fathers , and grandparents .
Hello , SEIU ! It is so great to be here as you gather and take Detroit by storm .
I am so honored to be here , to congratulate all of you on the incredible progress you continue to make under your president Mary Kay Henry , secretary-treasurer Gerry Hudson , and all of your executive vice presidents .
You know , standing behind me are some of the SEIU members that I 've had the great honor of meeting over the past year .
Thank you , Terrell , for sharing your story . I was so touched by what you had to say and the others with whom I met just from Chicago , to L.A. to New Haven and places in between to hear what you do , how you do it , how you love doing it .
But how it 's becoming impossible to continue the work you love , in childcare or home health care , if you do not have a living wage .
I am here to tell you that I join with you to do everything we can to make sure that the men and women of SEIU who are providing care for our children , our elderly , people with disabilities , you all have a living wage .
I do sort of wish that the presumptive Republican nominee could have been around to hear the stories that I heard .
Maybe then he wouldn't say wages are too high in this country .
Maybe he would finally open his ears and listen to what working people everywhere are saying that America needs a raise !
I really can't think of a better way to start the week than standing with the brothers and sisters of SEIU . You keep America healthy , care for our loved ones , help people with disabilities live independently .
You keep our cities , our states , and our schools running .
You clean our buildings , and protect our communities . So today , I want to say something that I don't think you hear enough
: Thank you . Thank you , thank you , thank you .
I know that you are often unsung heroes . And I want you to know this : Your fights are my fights .
Just like the theme of this conference says : Together , we are unstoppable .
I 'm thrilled to see so many friends from my home state of New York here today .
And friends from across the country who have helped me in this primary campaign .
You braved the snow in Iowa and the rain in South Carolina , you 've knocked doors in New Hampshire and got on buses to come to Nevada .
Everywhere I go these days , the purple t-shirts are out in force .
Like a lot of great things about America , this campaign is union-built , and I could not be prouder .
You 've had my back and I will always have yours .
Because as I 've traveled the country I 've had the chance , really the privilege and talked with health care workers , home care workers , childcare workers , fast food workers , airport workers , and janitors , and nurses .
I 've heard again and again : There has never been more at stake for working families in America than right now .
This election , my friends , from where I stand is about knocking down all the barriers that hold families and workers back .
Building ladders of opportunity in their place . Coming together to get incomes rising and creating more good jobs that provide dignity and pride .
That 's what SEIU has always fought for . And with your help , we are going to win in November .
I am the granddaughter of a factory worker who operated a loom at the Scranton Lace Works in Pennsylvania .
My father put everything he had into a small fabric printing shop in Chicago .
My mother was out on her own working as a housemaid at the age of 14 .
I grew up respecting the dignity of hard work and what it takes to provide a good , middle class life , where you really can believe that your children will be better off than you have been .
So that 's why I believe that when unions are strong , America is strong .
There is no doubt , although some may question it , unions helped build the strongest middle class in the history of the world .
SEIU is not only part of that noble tradition , you 've been on the frontlines of the fight for affordable health care , safe working conditions , and fair , predictable schedules .
And today , you 're leading the movement to raise the minimum wage , which will lift 35 million working Americans out of poverty .
In fact , the American labor movement pioneered the basic bargain that made our country great : If you work hard and you do your part , you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead .
You 're not just fighting for your you 're fighting for all working families .
And I 'm proud to be in the trenches fighting alongside you .
Because I also know strong families are the backbone of our economy and our country .
So to everyone here , to all of you who have ever faced a hostile legislature , a union-busting governor , or both : Help is on the way .
We are going to defend the right to organize , protect collective bargaining .
Let 's make the jobs of the future good union jobs that can't be outsourced .
And let 's say what we all know : right to work ' is wrong for workers , and wrong for America .
I know that and you know that and it 's time we make sure everyone knows that .
Because thanks to the determination and sacrifice of working people like you all over this country and because of the leadership of President we 've worked our way back from the worst financial crisis in a generation .
You see , I don't think the President gets the credit he deserves for saving our economy .
But our work is far from finished . I 've heard from so many families who are still struggling .
Corporate profits keep going up , and so do everyday living expenses , but paychecks for most people still are not growing the way they should .
Too many families worry about how to keep the lights on and the rent paid .
Parents run themselves ragged trying to balance responsibilities at home and work .
It can be even harder for parents raising kids with special needs or chronic illnesses .
Like LaTonya Allen , a homecare worker I met from Atlanta .
Her 29-year-old daughter has cerebral palsy . LaTonya is working around the clock to support her family on $9 an hour .
She has no benefits , no vacation , no sick days so when she got hurt on the job , she went to work on crutches , with a broken bone in her hip .
She is not asking for life to be easy . It ain't no crystal staircase ; she knows that .
But no one should have to choose between taking care of their health or paying the bills .
LaTonya works so hard , she works hard to do right by her family .
She deserves a country that will do right by her .
That is what 's at stake in this election . Because the families I 've met across the country come from different backgrounds , they earn different incomes , but they all desperately want to give their kids a good life .
And they 're up against pressures and problems too big for them to solve on their own .
In many ways , our economy and our workplaces are built still for a different time , when many moms stayed home , when one parent could earn enough to support a family .
Don't you think it 's time , finally , that we catch up to how American families actually live and work in today 's world ?
Well I sure do , that 's why I have been laying out an agenda and I thank SEIU for helping me with that agenda , Mary Kay .
First , we 've got to do more to raise families ' incomes .
Let 's start by raising the federal minimum wage . And let 's support local efforts to go even higher .
I am proud to stand with SEIU and workers across the country organizing in the fight for $15 and a union .
Every worker everywhere in America deserves a fair wage and a voice on the job .
So thank you for leading this fight , because when we fight , we win .
Let 's also fight for paid family leave . Too many moms , and a lot of them right here today , too many moms have to go back to work just days after their babies are born like the homecare worker I met from Minnesota , who had to return a week after having a C-section .
How else was she going to put food on the table for a toddler and a new baby ?
And too many dads and parents of adopted children don't get any paid leave at all .
Neither do sons and daughters struggling to take care of their aging parents .
None of this is fair to families . Donald Trump may not care but we do .
And so do working families across our country . We know America is better than this .
So let 's finally guarantee equal pay for women . After all , it 's 2016 .
Don't you think it 's about time ? When a woman is paid unfairly and unequally that doesn't just shortchange her it shortchanges her whole family .
Let 's encourage more employers , both in the private and the public sector , to embrace family-friendly policies , like predictable scheduling .
Together , we 'll do whatever we can to fight to finally put quality childcare within the reach of every family .
You know that in many states , childcare is more expensive than rent , it 's more expensive even than college tuition .
That puts parents in an impossible position . Just ask Artheta Peters from Cleveland , Ohio .
She loves her job caring for an 8-year-old with a muscle disease .
But she doesn't earn enough to afford childcare for her own children , so she 's forced to leave them at home with an older sibling .
It breaks her heart , but she doesn't have a choice .
In fact , in some states , two parents earning the minimum wage have to spend about 20 percent of their income on childcare .
For a single parent , it 's 40 percent . That is way too high .
Let 's make it so no family ever has to spend more than 10 percent of their income for childcare .
And let 's give childcare workers a raise . Right now , dog trainers are paid more than childcare workers .
Look , I believe in training dogs , but you don't dress your dog up and send your dog to kindergarten , do you ?
You don't dream of sending your dog to college , do you ?
You don't worry about whether your dog is going to be exposed to dangerous influences because you can't afford quality childcare , do you ?
This is crazy , there 's nothing more important than our children .
When I sat down with SEIU members in Chicago , I heard one heartbreaking story after another from parents who can't afford to give their own children the care that they give other people 's kids every day .
So as president I 'll support states and cities that take steps to increase pay for childcare providers and early educators , we 're going to make childcare more affordable at the same time for families .
I will also launch a Care Workers Initiative across every level of government .
Over and over again , homecare and childcare workers that I 've met with across the country have told me they want more chances to increase their skills .
Let 's work together to create more opportunities so that workers who are caring for others can grow in their jobs and fight for fair wages .
Let 's give them a chance to come together to make their voices heard and we have a stronger , better system for the people who do this vital work .
And if we 're serious about doing all of this and supporting families , we have to be serious about facing up to the reality of systemic racism .
And that means dismantling the school-to-prison pipeline once and for all .
We have a moral obligation to fight for justice and equity everywhere , and that includes ending , ending the era of mass incarceration , rebuilding the trust between law enforcement and communities , and putting a stop to the horror of young African Americans being killed by or dying in police custody .
We owe that to our children , and we owe it to the parents whose children have been so tragically taken from them .
That 's why I 'm proud that SEIU members across the country are standing up for criminal justice reform and calling for environmental and economic justice for every community .
I will be right by your side , every step of the way .
And there 's one more thing that I want you to help on and that is ending the epidemic of gun violence that kills 33,000 Americans a year .
We need comprehensive background checks , to close the online loophole , close the gun show loophole , close what 's called the Charleston loophole .
Stop the unaccountability of gun makers and sellers . Saturday , Saturday night I was in Fort Lauderdale , with mothers who have lost their children to gun violence , including Trayvon Martin 's mother .
There were mothers from Chicago and Washington , from New York and Sandy Hook .
Mothers joined together , not only in grief and loss , but in courage and resolve .
They 're going to do everything they can and I am going to help them every way I can .
I am committed to doing all we must to help say lives .
And I 'll tell you right now , the gun lobby doesn't intimidate me and it shouldn't intimidate anybody .
Supporting all families in all ways is a necessity . And when I talk about families , and what I want to see us do to stay true to our values and give every single person in this country a chance to live up to his or her God-given potential .
Mr. Trump likes to say I 'm playing the woman card .
Well , you know what I say : if fighting for equal pay , and paid family leave , and raising the minimum wage and affordable childcare , is playing the woman card , then deal me in .
It shouldn't surprise us that he has a very different take on all this .
At a time when families are struggling to pay for childcare and so much else , Donald Trump actually stood on a debate stage and argued that Americans are being paid too much .
He actually talked , here this because you need to tell your friends , he actually talked about getting rid of the national minimum wage altogether .
Shouldn't be surprising , he 's hired union-busters to break up organizing campaigns on the properties he owns .
But we 're not talking about any ordinary anti-union , anti-worker Republican .
A lot of Republicans themselves say Donald Trump is a disaster waiting to happen to America .
What little we know of his economic policies would be from running up our debt , to starting trade wars , to letting Wall Street run wild all of that could cause another crash and devastate working families and our country .
Trump economics is a recipe for lower wages , fewer jobs , more debt .
He could bankrupt America like he 's bankrupted his companies .
Ask yourself , how could anybody lose money running a casino ?
Really ? And that 's not all . I hear every day from families who are afraid of what a Donald Trump presidency would mean for millions of immigrants living and working in America .
16 million people in America are part of what 's called mixed status
families , where some loved ones are citizens and some aren't .
Maybe the children were born here but one or both parents are undocumented .
I 'm sure some of you have families like that .
These are not just statistics , are they ? We 're talking about real people men , women and children .
We 're talking about neighbors , coworkers , and friends .
A few months ago in Las Vegas , I met a 10-year-old girl named Karla Ortiz .
She started to cry as she told me that her parents had a letter of deportation , and she was scared they would be taken away from her .
In a lot of ways , Karla is a typical , bright fifth grader .
She loves science experiments , math , and Charlotte 's Web
. But she leaves for school every day terrified that her mom and dad who are working hard to support their family , won't be there when she gets home .
Her parents had to take her to a heart specialist , who explained that living in constant fear was making her little heart beat dangerously fast .
When Donald Trump talks about deporting 11 million immigrants , he 's talking about ripping apart families like Karla 's .
He 's talking about sending a deportation force to schools , workplaces , and homes to round up moms , dads , grandparents , even children .
When he talks about ending birthright citizenship , he 's talking about kicking children who are born here out of the only country they know .
When he calls immigrants rapists and murderers , he 's talking about families like Karla 's and many of yours .
The most important measure of any society is how we treat those at the beginning , our children , and those at the end , the elderly .
What kind of country would we be if we let Donald Trump rip our families apart ?
We have to reject this wrong vision for America with one strong , clear voice .
We have to stand up for hardworking American families and that includes hard-working immigrant families .
Moms and dads should be preparing their kids for their futures not for the possibility that they could be hauled away at any moment .
In my first 100 days as president , I will introduce comprehensive immigration reform .
And I will build , I will build on President Obama 's executive actions and keep going , fighting every day to fix our broken immigration system and keep families together .
These are just some of the reasons this is one of the most important elections in our lifetimes .
The only thing standing between Donald Trump and the Oval Office is all of us .
We are coming to the end of the Democratic primaries .
I applaud Senator Sanders and his supporters for challenging us to get unaccountable money out of our politics ; we are going to take on the crisis of income inequality .
And we are going to unify the Democratic Party and stop Donald Trump .
There is so much more that unites than divides us .
And we 're going up against a candidate who will pull us backwards on every issue we care about .
We need a president who will use the bully pulpit to stand up for working families but the last thing we need is a bully in the pulpit .
And nobody knows better than a union like SEIU that the only way to stand up to a bully is together .
That is , that is what I want to do with all of you ; it 's what unions are about .
It 's what I 've been about my entire life , ever since I went to work for the Children 's Defense Fund .
We 're going to have each other 's back . We 're going to lift each other up .
We 're going to leave no one behind . We 're going to build a better future not just for yourselves , but for the hardworking people and their children across America .
That 's how we will be our best . The lesson of the labor movement , the lesson of America 's history , through good times and hard times , is that we are stronger together .
So let 's keep fighting , let 's keep working , let 's win an election in November and make sure our country is the country that we know represents our best values , not our worst .
Thank you , and God bless you . Hey , it is great to be here with all of you , and I am thrilled to be in Orange County .
I 've got to tell I 've got to tell you , it was a treat to be introduced by Jamie Lee Curtis .
I am thrilled that she is here with us , and I really did like A Fish Called Wanda , and Freaky Friday .
But I like her enthusiasm , her energy , her heart .
And I 'm so pleased , too , to be here with my longtime friend , someone who I 'm going to put this back in here .
It 's it 's okay . It 's okay . That 's fine .
We don't mind . We don't mind . Because you got everybody all revved up .
But I want to also thank my friend , my former colleague , both in the Congress and in President Obama 's cabinet , Hilda Solis .
Hilda has been a Congresswoman , the Secretary of Labor , and is now LA County Supervisor .
And in every job she 's had , she has performed magnificently , and helped so many people .
And she 's a dear , dear friend of mine .
Now , we are here at the home of the UFCW Local 324 .
I want to thank Greg Conger and Rick Eiden and Greg for welcoming us here , and all of the UFCW family .
And thank Andrea Zinder for appearing on the free program .
Thanks also to Art Brown and everybody from Buena Park who has made us so welcome .
And mostly , I want to thank all of you .
One of the great things about campaigning across the country is to stand where I 'm standing and look out at this audience and audiences like it , and really see America .
Seeing what we are as a nation I have this old-fashioned idea that we are stronger together .
Stronger together when we make the economy work for everybody , not just those at the top .
Stronger together when we knock down all the barriers that stand in the way of any American getting ahead and staying ahead .
And I love all of you too . So you know what 's at stake in this election , because here you are .
You understand , we have a big a choice . As you just heard from Jamie Lee , this is a point in our history where there are not just one , but several hinges here at home and around the world .
The decisions we make , who we are as a people , whether we 're going to continue moving forward together or we 're going to build walls instead of bridges .
We have decisions to make . And I 've talked a lot in this campaign about what 's at stake , and I 'm going to continue talking about it , because I don't want anybody to be surprised .
When people run for office and they tell you what they want to do , you should believe them .
One of my great friends , and one of our great American icons , Maya Angelo , said , when somebody shows you who they are , believe them .
And that 's why I 've gone across the country now for more than a year , ending up here in California .
Talking about what kind of country I want for all of us , not just some of us .
A country where we are creating more good jobs with rising incomes .
A country where we are not only growing the economy , but making it fairer by raising the minimum wage , and guaranteeing equal pay for women 's work .
A country where an education system works for everybody , starting with early childhood education so every single child can be better prepared to succeed .
We have a big decision in the selection . And it does have to do with the economy .
It is a historic fact , our economy does better when we have a Democrat in the White House .
And we don't have to go back 100 years . Let 's just go back 25 .
When my husband was president , we had 23 million more jobs .
Incomes went up for everybody , not just people at the top .
That 's what we want again . During those 8 years , median family income went up 17 percent .
Median African family income went up 33 percent . We were all rising together .
We lifted more people out of poverty . We ended up with a balanced budget and a surplus .
We were on the right track , my friends . And what happened ?
The Republicans got the White House back . Now , look , they do have they do have a point of view .
I know and respect , they are consistent . Consistently wrong , but they are consistent .
They believe that if you just keep cutting taxes on the wealthiest , it will all trickle down .
So they did . They took a machete to the tax system and cut taxes on the wealthy .
They took their eyes off the financial markets and the mortgage markets .
And we know what happened . And California was especially hard hit .
9 million Americans lost their jobs . 5 million homes were lost .
And we could have had a Great Depression , not just a Great Recession .
Anybody who thinks back to how scary those times were knows that .
And I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for digging us out of the ditch the Republicans dropped us into .
So listen carefully . Because when Donald Trump talks about the economy , he is talking about trickle down on steroids .
He has put forth an economic plan that is by a billionaire , for billionaires .
And it is going to hurt a lot of people .
He doesn't seem to actually care about making America great so much as he seems to care about making himself look great .
And here 's what I want you to know . Because I bet everybody in here knows somebody or knows somebody who knows somebody who lost their home .
Right ? And I want you to know that Donald Trump actually rooted for the housing crash that caused 5 million families their homes .
I 'm not making this up . We called him out on it yesterday using his own words .
And you know what he said in response ? He bragged about what he did .
He said , and I 'm quoting now , That 's the kind of thinking our country needs .
He said , profiting off of working people losing their homes would be a quote ,
Good result . So a good result in Donald Trump 's world is he gets his , and you get hurt .
So instead of dividing Americans , we need to unite Americans .
And one of the ways I 'm going to do that is by promoting more infrastructure jobs , because the state of our infrastructure is a national emergency .
We have bridges that are right now too dangerous to drive on , although people take a deep breath and drive across them .
We have roads that are so riddled and pitted and potholed that people driving them are having to pay hundreds of dollars to repair the damage .
We have airports that are stuck in the mid-20th century instead of the 21st century .
We have water systems that are unsafe for children to drink the water from .
So we have to rebuild the infrastructure we have , and we have to build a stronger future together because every community in our country , every single one of them , deserves clean water , clean air , clean energy , and think of the millions of people we can put to work , including some of those laborers right down there in the front .
Every kid in our country deserves a good school with a good teacher no matter what ZIP code that child lives in .
So we 're going to make investments that will put people to work , will fix the infrastructure , including a lot of our schools that are literally falling down around our students and teachers .
I have visited schools , my friends , that are filled with mold , ceiling tiles falling down , water damage everywhere in America .
That 's exactly right . That is wrong , and we 're going to put people to work fixing our schools as well as everything else .
And I want you to compare this . See , I want to fix our schools , our bridges , our roads , our ports , our airports , our water systems .
Donald Trump wants to build a wall . A great big wall , as he says .
A huge wall . And he says he 's going to make Mexico pay for it .
Now , the best estimates I have seen is that this wall would cost , oh , at least $25 billion .
That is enough to build 16 Golden Gate Bridges or 1,500 new elementary schools .
It is enough to send more than 300,000 veterans to college or install enough renewable energy to power 5 million homes .
We sure could help a lot of hardworking Americans if we took that money and invested it here and made a real difference in the lives and the jobs and the schools and the opportunities that Americans have .
So we have a real choice in this election . And , of course , you know one of the biggest choices is about immigration .
I support comprehensive immigration reform as a path to citizenship .
I have said in my first 100 days I will send a plan to Congress .
We will still working immediately because I want us to get this issue behind us .
And , you see , I have this I guess old-fashioned idea that if we do comprehensive immigration reform , and we invest in infrastructure , the biggest infrastructure investment since Dwight Eisenhower built the interstate highway system we are going to have more than enough jobs for everybody .
That is what we want in America because I want everybody to have jobs with purpose and dignity .
And I want incomes to start going up again , the way they did in the 1990s .
I want people to get the raise for their hard work .
I want more companies and I 've got a plan to incentivize this I want more companies to share their profits with their workers , not just their CEOs .
I also believe that we can make investments in advanced manufacturing , and one of the best areas for that is fighting climate change .
Climate change is real . It is not a Chinese hoax , like Donald Trump says .
It is affecting parts of our country right now . You can look at villages in Alaska that are being battered and some people being forced to move .
You can go to Miami and on sunny afternoons you can see daylight flooding because the tide is so high .
You can see the results right now . Now , this can either be something that we wring our hands over and ignore , or something we say , you know , not only is it important we do this , but we can create a lot of jobs .
Some country is going to be the 21st century clean energy superpower .
I think it is going to be China , Germany , or us .
I intend for it to be us . I intend for it to be us .
I have a plan to install a half a billion more solar panels by the end of my first term and enough clean renewable energy to power every home by the end of my second term .
And these are jobs that can't be exported ; they 've got to be done right here in California and across America .
You see , I am tired of people running for president who just do nothing but criticize America .
I am tired of people who are so negative about our country .
Do we have problems ? Well , of course we have problems .
If you 've been alive longer than an hour , you 've got a problem .
I speak from experience . So what do Americans do ?
Do we either power down and moan and groan about how bad things are ?
Or do we make promises we can't keep and get people even more frustrated and angry ?
Or do we roll up our sleeves and get to work ?
I have no doubt that we are going to create the jobs of the future , enough jobs that people who do their part and work hard are going to be able to get ahead and stay ahead .
I have no doubt that we are going to have an education system that provides the skills and the training that our young people and our not-so-young people need , because the job market is so churning people need to get new skills from time to time .
Now , you could say , Well , I don't want to get any new skills ; I want to keep doing the job I did 30 years ago .
We are not living in the world of 30 years ago .
We have all got to pull together . We are stronger together .
So starting with early childhood education , going into elementary and secondary education , where I want to be a good partner with the teachers of America , not pointing fingers and scapegoating them .
Getting more technical education available to high school students , so that they can get the skills that will make them employable in the job market .
Making community college free , so that everybody who wants to continue or come back and acquire skills can do so .
I want to make college affordable . I want to work to help you pay down your debt , so that you are not crippled by it .
We can do all of this . We know how to do it .
Because we 're here in a union hall , I want to say a special word about the great work unions do with apprenticeship programs .
I want more businesses to work with unions to do more apprenticeship training , and I want more businesses to start their own apprenticeship training .
I am willing to give them a tax credit in order to train young people to be able to do the jobs that are needed today .
We have to do a better job linking up people with where jobs are available .
We can do this . We can make this happen .
And then , when it comes to healthcare because , think about it , what are the three things that keep you up at night ?
Jobs , education costs , training skills , and healthcare .
I will continue to improve the Affordable Care Act . I will work to get the costs down , premiums , co-pays , deductibles , prescription drug costs .
Before there was something called Obamacare , there was something called Hillarycare .
And , you know , I had to work I had to work really hard to get this done , and we didn't .
But then I turned around and created the Children 's Health Insurance Program which insures 8 million kids .
So we made progress , but I was thrilled when President Obama passed and signed the Affordable Care Act .
And I meet somebody every week around the country , often as I shake hands after an event like this , who says ,
Thank you for defending the Affordable Care Act . I don't know what my family would have done without it .
Thank you , because I didn't have insurance . I worked , but I didn't have insurance .
I finally got it , I went to the doctor , I found out I was sick , but I 'm going to be okay because I got there in time .
So when somebody like Donald Trump or other Republican says ,
Hey , we 're going to shut down the Affordable Care Act , and don't tell you what they would substitute for it , be wary , because they want to go back to the insurance companies calling the shots , so that people with preexisting conditions , like being humanwouldn't be able to afford their health insurance .
So we do have to make improvements in the Affordable Care Act , but we 're going to continue our march toward universal healthcare coverage in America .
And there are two areas where we don't pay enough attention , and I 'm serious about this : mental health and addiction .
We have too many people who are suffering from one or both .
We have too many people going to jail or prison because of one or both .
We still have a stigma about mental health , don't we ?
If you have diabetes , you tell people . If you have depression , you worry , what will they think of you if you tell them ?
The more we are learning about how our bodies work and our genetic makeup , and all of that , we have to treat all health problems , whether they are above or below your neck , the same way .
People deserve to get the medical care they need . And when it comes to addiction , we need much more treatment and recovery , and diversion from the criminal justice system to help people who are addicted .
So we 've got work to do that will bring us together , not divide us .
And that may be as important as anything to getting the work done .
You see , I think there are three big tests that anybody asking for your vote should meet .
Number one , can you produce positive results for somebody ?
And as Jamie Lee said , what is your track record doing that ?
Have you helped other people ? Have you made a difference in their lives ?
Have you lifted up the concerns that people have and tried to work with them , so that they could break down the barriers that stood in their way ?
That 's why I have been specific about what I would do because I want you to hold me accountable .
I 'm not going to just stand up here and give you platitudes and rhetoric .
I 'm going to tell you what I want to do because I need you to be part of how we do it together .
And the second big task is , when you vote in the California primary , when you vote in November , you 're voting for the commander in chief as well as the President , right ?
And here is where I 'm especially concerned about Donald Trump .
You know , just in the last few weeks , he 's attacked our closest ally , Britain ; he has praised the dangerous dictator of North Korea he has advocated pulling out of NATO , our strongest military alliance ; he has suggested it 's okay with him if more countries get nuclear weapons .
He 's even gone so far as to say , well , maybe he would use nuclear weapons against ISIS , which is not even a state .
He has said we should return to torture , and he wants to ban all Muslims from coming into our country a country founded on religious freedom .
I mean , and that 's just the beginning . Picking fights with everybody ?
Pointing fingers and scapegoating ? That may be good for reality TV , but when you are the President of the United States , you don't say to heads of government in fact , you don't even say to Senators and Members of you 're fired .
They 'd look at you like you were crazy .
You 've got to work with people . You 've got to make everybody feel that they 've got a stake in solving the problem .
Let me give you a quick couple of examples . All this loose talk about Muslims , it 's not just heard in the United States , it 's heard around the world .
And I said months ago , what Donald Trump is saying is going to be used to recruit terrorists by ISIS .
I knew it was already going on but that wasn't public yet , so they said ,
Oh , no , no that can't be . Well now , just recently , we have absolute evidence oh , yes it is .
They 're taking his words out of his mouth , denigrating Muslims , and putting them into propaganda videos .
Why are we making the world more dangerous for Americans ?
For our friends and our allies and partners around the world ?
When I was secretary of state , I was in Cambodia in November 2012 .
And I got a phone call from the Israeli government saying Hamas , the terrorist group that 's next door in Gaza , is shooting missiles again into Israel , and we 've tried to talk to people to get them to stop but if they don't stop , we 're going to have to invade to stop them .
I said , Wait a minute , I 'll be right there .
That 's the kind of thing you can say when you 're secretary of state , right ?
You get on a plane , and you fly all night , and you end up in Tel Aviv , and then you get in an armored car , and you drive to Jerusalem .
And then I began dealing with the Israeli security cabinet .
And they were saying , the Middle East has changed so much because of the so-called Arab Spring ; we don't know who to talk to .
We keep trying to reach out to have somebody say , you 've got to stop this , and the most likely person to be able to do that is the then-President of Egypt , a member of the Muslim Brotherhood ; a man by the name of Morsi .
I said , Okay , well let 's talk through what we want , what is the best outcome , and I will fly to Cairo and negotiate with President Morsi .
And we did and I did . And I want you to think about , here 's a guy who 's the president of Egypt not just a Muslim , but a member of the Muslim Brotherhood and I 'm trying to negotiate a cease fire to prevent another war .
My life would have been miserable , and I 'm not sure we would have gotten it done , if we 'd had the kind of language , the rhetoric , being used about Muslims coming from somebody running for President of the United States or heaven forbid , being President of the United States .
So these words have consequences . You know ? The reality show doesn't end and the new show come on .
People remember . They listen . And the decisions that get to the situation room in the White House are the hardest decisions .
If they weren't hard , somebody would have decided them as they came up the ladder .
Hilda was in the cabinet , she knows that ; she made a lot of tough calls on behalf of labor rules and regulations .
And she could make most of them but if they were particularly contentious , she had to go to the White House and they had to have a meeting about it .
Well , the same with foreign policy and national security .
So I was one of the small group of people asked to advise the President about whether the intelligence we had was strong enough about where maybe Bin Laden was to take action .
And I had a particular personal interest in this because I was a senator from New York on 9/11 .
And I went I was at Ground Zero 24 hours after we were attacked .
I saw what as the closest I hope I ever come to seeing hell .
I just can't even tell you . Even think about it now just upsets me .
Standing on the street where there was a black cloud of dust , and toxins , and a horrible wall , and through the wall were breaking fire fighters dragging their axes after having been on the pile 24 hours trying to find somebody alive .
Iron workers and other construction trade workers , labor workers , and the like dropped what they were doing and rushed to be helpful rushing toward danger .
So I took the hunt for Bin Laden personally on behalf of the 3,000 people , many of them my constituent 's families .
So when we began to evaluate that evidence , it was there 's no flashing light which says ,
He 's here , he 's here , go get him .
You look at it , you evaluate it , you get more information , you ask skeptical people to take a look at it , you talk to the Military about what the options are .
And then at the end , the President asked every one of us in that room what we thought he should do .
And people who I deeply respect , we disagreed . Some people said ,
You know what , the intelligence is not strong enough , we can't take the risk .
Others said , Well , it 's strong but probably not strong enough , but I think we could launch a missile and take out the compound .
And then others , including myself , said we would never know if we got Bin Laden , we have to send in a SEAL team .
And at the end of that conversation , this is my point , even the President 's advisors secretary of state , secretary of defense , head of the CIA , head of the Joint Chiefs of the military the president has to make the decision .
And President Obama , who is a thoughtful , deliberative decision maker you can agree or disagree but he studies it , he thinks about it , and he tries to make a logical , responsible decision .
And he said he was going to retire , and he was going to review it all , and make his decision .
Now , he made the decision to send in the SEAL team and we did bring Bin Laden to justice .
It all comes down to who the president is . It all comes down to how thoughtful , careful , experienced the president is .
And this will be a big part of the election this year because we live in a dangerous world .
We have a lot of people who are out there making it their business to disrupt the world , to disrupt Europe , the Middle East , America , to cause problems like that dictator in North Korea .
We need a steady , strong hand in order to make the best decisions .
And the final test is will the President unify us or further divide us ?
I see a lot of evidence that Donald Trump is a divider , not a uniter .
I don't know whether it makes him feel good to insult people ; I don't understand the motivation .
He 's insulted immigrants , he makes a habit of insulting women .
Last night he insulted the Republican Governor Martinez of New Mexico , gratuitously .
I don't know , he seems to have something about women .
I don't know . I do love one of my favorite Trump comments in the last couple of weeks is , he does have foreign policy experience dealing with Russia because he staged the Miss Universe Pageant in Moscow .
That was a particular favorite . Regardless of why he says what he says , insulting John McCain 's war heroism , insulting a person with disabilities , obviously denigrating Muslims , whatever reason he does it , it is setting Americans against Americans .
It is a recipe for more divisiveness at a time where we must be united , and where I believe Americans want us to get things done that will actually help them and help our country , strengthen our economy , create better opportunities .
And remember I said , when somebody tells you what they do believe in ?
Think of what he has said about our rights . So here 's where I stand .
I will defend a woman 's right to make their own decisions .
I will defend Planned Parenthood against these . I will defend marriage equality and end discrimination against the LGBT community .
I will defend voters ' rights , which are under attack from North Carolina to Texas , and I will appoint Supreme Court Justices who will overturn .
I will protect the right to organize and bargain collectively , and be a member of a union .
And I will take on the gun lobby to get common sense gun safety .
But I can't do any of this without your help .
You know that this primary in California on June 7th is really important because California is always about the future .
California is where the future starts in America . So I need you , if you can , vote my mail some of you already have .
Be sure to vote on June 7th , bring your friends , bring your colleagues , your family members .
Because I promise you this , if you go and vote for me in this primary , I will stand up and fight for you and fight for the country we love , and fight for the future we deserve .
Let 's go out and win the future . Thank you .
Thank you , thank you so much . Thank you all very much .
Thank you . Thank you San Diego for that warm , warm welcome and thanks to Ellen for those moving words , her introduction , and for reminding us it 's not only our men and women in uniform that serve our country , it 's their families , their spouses , their children , and we are grateful to each and every one of them .
I want to recognize and thank Congressman Scott Peters for being here , thank you very much .
And all of the other electeds and service members , active duty and retired National Guard and Reservists , veterans , military spouses , family members , all who are with us today .
On Monday , we observed Memorial Day a day that means a great deal to San Diego , home of so many active-duty and former military and their families .
We honor the sacrifice of those who died for our country in many ways by living our values , by making this a stronger and fairer nation , and by carrying out a smart and principled foreign policy .
That 's what I want to speak about today the challenges we face in protecting our country , and the choice at stake in this election .
It 's a choice between a fearful America that 's less secure and less engaged with the world , and a strong , confident America that leads to keep our country safe and our economy growing .
As secretary of state , senator and first lady , I had the honor of representing America abroad and helping shape our foreign policy at home .
As a candidate for president , there 's nothing I take more seriously than our national security .
I 've offered clear strategies for how to defeat ISIS , strengthen our alliances , and make sure Iran never gets a nuclear weapon .
And I 'm going to keep America 's security at the heart of my campaign .
Because as you know so well , Americans aren't just electing a president in November .
We 're choosing our next Commander-in-Chief the person we count on to decide questions of war and peace , life and death .
And like many across our country and around the world , I believe the person the Republicans have nominated for president cannot do the job .
Donald Trump 's ideas aren't just different they are dangerously incoherent .
They 're not even really ideas just a series of bizarre rants , personal feuds , and outright lies .
He is not just unprepared he is temperamentally unfit to hold an office that requires knowledge , stability and immense responsibility .
This is not someone who should ever have the nuclear codes because it 's not hard to imagine Donald Trump leading us into a war just because somebody got under his very thin skin .
We cannot put the security of our children and grandchildren in Donald Trump 's hands .
We cannot let him roll the dice with America . This is a man who said that more countries should have nuclear weapons , including Saudi Arabia .
This is someone who has threatened to abandon our allies in NATO the countries that work with us to root out terrorists abroad before they strike us at home .
He believes we can treat the U.S. economy like one of his casinos and default on our debts to the rest of the world , which would cause an economic catastrophe far worse than anything we experienced in 2008 .
He has said that he would order our military to carry out torture and the murder of civilians who are related to suspected terrorists even though those are war crimes .
He says he doesn't have to listen to our generals or our admirals , our ambassadors and other high officials , because he has quote a very good brain .
He also said , I know more about ISIS than the generals do , believe me .
You know what ? I don't believe him . He says climate change is a hoax invented by the Chinese , and he has the gall to say that prisoners of war like John McCain aren't heroes .
He praises dictators like Vladimir Putin and picks fights with our friends including the British prime minister , the mayor of London , the German chancellor , the president of Mexico and the pope .
He says he has foreign policy experience because he ran the Miss Universe pageant in Russia .
And to top it off , he believes America is weak .
An embarrassment . He called our military a disaster . He said we are and I quote a third-world country .
And he 's been saying things like that for decades .
Those are the words my friends of someone who doesn't understand America or the world .
And they 're the words of someone who would lead us in the wrong direction .
Because if you really believe America is weak with our military , our values , our capabilities that no other country comes close to matching then you don't know America .
And you certainly don't deserve to lead it . That 's why even if I weren't in this race I 'd be doing everything I could to make sure Donald Trump never becomes president because I believe he will take our country down a truly dangerous path .
Unlike him , I have some experience with the tough calls and the hard work of statecraft .
I wrestled with the Chinese over a climate deal in Copenhagen , brokered a ceasefire between Israel and Hamas , negotiated the reduction of nuclear weapons with Russia , twisted arms to bring the world together in global sanctions against Iran , and stood up for the rights of women , religious minorities and LGBT people around the world .
And I have , I have sat in the Situation Room and advised the President on some of the toughest choices he faced .
So I 'm not new to this work . And I 'm proud to run on my record , because I think the choice before the American people in this election is clear .
I believe in strong alliances ; clarity in dealing with our rivals ; and a rock-solid commitment to the values that have always made America great .
And I believe with all my heart that America is an exceptional country that we 're still , in Lincoln 's words , the last , best hope of earth .
We are not a country that cowers behind walls . We lead with purpose , and we prevail .
And if America doesn't lead , we leave a vacuum and that will either cause chaos , or other countries will rush in to fill the void .
Then they 'll be the ones making the decisions about your lives and jobs and safety and trust me , the choices they make will not be to our benefit .
That is not an outcome we can live with . As I see it , there are some important things our next president must do to secure American leadership and keep us safe and our economy growing in the years ahead .
These are all areas in which Donald Trump and I profoundly disagree .
And they are all critical to our future . First , we need to be strong at home .
That means investing in our infrastructure , education and innovation the fundamentals of a strong economy .
We need to reduce income inequality , because our country can't lead effectively when so many are struggling to provide the basics for their families .
And we need to break down the barriers that hold Americans back , including barriers of bigotry and discrimination .
Compare that with what Trump wants to do . His economic plans would add more than $30 trillion that 's trillion with a t $30 trillion to our national debt over the next 20 years .
He has no ideas on education . No ideas on innovation .
He has a lot of ideas about who to blame , but no clue about what to do .
None of what Donald Trump is offering will make America stronger at home .
And that would make us weaker in the world . Second , we need to stick with our allies .
America 's network of allies is part of what makes us exceptional .
And our allies deliver for us every day . Our armed forces fight terrorists together ; our diplomats work side by side .
Allies provide staging areas for our military , so we can respond quickly to events on the other side of the world .
And they share intelligence that helps us identify and defuse potential threats .
Take the threat posed by North Korea perhaps the most repressive regime on the planet , run by a sadistic dictator who wants to develop long-range missiles that could carry a nuclear weapon to the United States .
When I was secretary of state , we worked closely with our allies Japan and South Korea to respond to this threat , including by creating a missile defense system that stands ready to shoot down a North Korean warhead , should its leaders ever be reckless enough to launch one at us .
The technology is ours . Key parts of it are located on Japanese ships .
All three countries contributed to it . And this month , all three of our militaries will run a joint drill to test it .
That 's the power of allies . And it 's the legacy of American troops who fought and died to secure those bonds , because they knew we were safer with friends and partners .
Now Moscow and Beijing are deeply envious of our alliances around the world , because they have nothing to match them .
They 'd love for us to elect a president who would jeopardize that source of strength .
If Donald gets his way , they 'll be celebrating in the Kremlin .
We cannot let that happen . That 's why it is no small thing when he talks about leaving NATO , or says he 'll stay neutral on Israel 's security .
It 's no small thing when he calls Mexican immigrants rapists and murderers .
We 're lucky to have two friendly neighbors on our land borders .
Why would he want to make one of them an enemy ?
And it 's no small thing when he suggests that America should withdraw our military support for Japan , encourage them to get nuclear weapons , and said this about a war between Japan and North Korea and I quote
If they do , they do . Good luck , enjoy yourself , folks .
I wonder if he even realizes he 's talking about nuclear war .
Yes , our friends need to contribute their fair share .
I made that point long before Donald Trump came onto the scene and a number of them have increased their defense spending .
The real debate here is whether we keep these alliances strong or cut them off .
What he says would weaken our country . Third , we need to embrace all the tools of American power , especially diplomacy and development , to be on the frontlines solving problems before they threaten us at home .
Diplomacy is often the only way to avoid a conflict that could end up exacting a much greater cost .
It takes patience , persistence and an eye on the long game but
it 's worth it . Take the nuclear agreement with Iran .
When President Obama took office , Iran was racing toward a nuclear bomb .
Some called for military action . But that could have ignited a broader war that could have mired our troops in another Middle Eastern conflict .
President Obama chose a different path . And I got to work leading the effort to impose crippling global sanctions .
We brought Iran to the table . We began talks .
And eventually , we reached an agreement that should block every path for Iran to get a nuclear weapon .
Now we must enforce that deal vigorously . And as I 've said many times before , our approach must be distrust and verify .
The world must understand that the United States will act decisively if necessary , including with military action , to stop Iran from getting a nuclear weapon .
In particular , Israel 's security is non-negotiable . They 're our closest ally in the region , and we have a moral obligation to defend them .
But there is no question that the world and the United States , we are safer now than we were before this agreement .
And we accomplished it without firing a single shot , dropping a single bomb or putting a single American soldier in harm 's way .
Donald Trump says we shouldn't have done the deal . We should have walked away .
But that would have meant no more global sanctions , and Iran resuming their nuclear program and the world blaming us .
So then what ? War ? Telling the world , good luck , you deal with Iran ?
Of course Trump doesn't have answers to those questions . Donald Trump doesn't know the first thing about Iran or its nuclear program .
Ask him . It 'll become very clear , very quickly .
There 's no risk of people losing their lives if you blow up a golf-course deal .
But it doesn't work like that in world affairs . Just like being interviewed on the same episode of 60 Minutes as Putin was , is not the same thing as actually dealing with Putin .
So the stakes in global statecraft are infinitely higher and more complex than in the world of luxury hotels .
We all know the tools Donald Trump brings to the table bragging , mocking , composing nasty tweets
I 'm willing to bet he 's writing a few right now .
But those tools won't do the trick . Rather than solving global crises , he would create new ones .
He has no sense of what it takes to deal with multiple countries with competing interests and reaching a solution that everyone can get behind .
In fact , he is downright contemptuous of that work .
And that means he 's much more likely to end up leading us into conflict .
Fourth , we need to be firm but wise with our rivals .
Countries like Russia and China often work against us . Beijing dumps cheap steel in our markets .
That hurts American workers . Moscow has taken aggressive military action in Ukraine , right on NATO 's doorstep .
Now I 've gone toe-to-toe with Russia and China , and many other different leaders around the world .
So I know we have to be able to both stand our ground when we must , and find common ground when we can .
That 's how I could work with Russia to conclude the New START treaty to reduce nuclear stockpiles , and with China to increase pressure on North Korea .
It 's how our diplomats negotiated the landmark agreement on climate change , which Trump now wants to rip up .
The key was never forgetting who we were dealing with not friends or allies , but countries that share some common interests with us amid many disagreements .
Donald doesn't see the complexity . He wants to start a trade war with China .
And I understand a lot of Americans have concerns about our trade agreements
I do too . But a trade war is something very different .
We went down that road in the 1930s . It made the Great Depression longer and more painful .
Combine that with his comments about defaulting on our debt , and it 's not hard to see how a Trump presidency could lead to a global economic crisis .
And I have to say , I don't understand Donald 's bizarre fascination with dictators and strongmen who have no love for America .
He praised China for the Tiananmen Square massacre ; he said it showed strength .
He said , You 've got to give Kim Jong Un credit for taking over North Korea something he did by murdering everyone he saw as a threat , including his own uncle , which Donald described gleefully , like he was recapping an action movie .
And he said if he were grading Vladimir Putin as a leader , he 'd give him an A .
Now , I 'll leave it to the psychiatrists to explain his affection for tyrants .
I just wonder how anyone could be so wrong about who America 's real friends are .
Because it matters . If you don't know exactly who you 're dealing with , men like Putin will eat your lunch .
Fifth , we need a real plan for confronting terrorists .
As we saw six months ago in San Bernardino , the threat is real and urgent .
Over the past year , I 've laid out my plans for defeating ISIS .
We need to take out their strongholds in Iraq and Syria by intensifying the air campaign and stepping up our support for Arab and Kurdish forces on the ground .
We need to keep pursuing diplomacy to end Syria 's civil war and close Iraq 's sectarian divide , because those conflicts are keeping ISIS alive .
We need to lash up with our allies , and ensure our intelligence services are working hand-in-hand to dismantle the global network that supplies money , arms , propaganda and fighters to the terrorists .
We need to win the battle in cyberspace . And of course we need to strengthen our defenses here at home .
That in a nutshell is my plan for defeating ISIS .
What 's Trump 's ? Well he won't say . He is literally keeping it a secret .
The secret , of course , is he has no idea what he 'd do to stop ISIS .
Just look at the few things he 's actually said on the subject .
He 's actually said and I quote maybe Syria should be a free zone for ISIS .
Oh , okay let a terrorist group have control of a major country in the Middle East .
Then he said we should send tens of thousands of American ground troops to the Middle East to fight ISIS .
He also refused to rule out using nuclear weapons against ISIS , which would mean mass civilian casualties .
It 's clear he doesn't have a clue what he 's talking about .
So we can't be certain which of these things he would do .
But we can be certain that he 's capable of doing any or all of them .
Letting ISIS run wild . Launching a nuclear attack . Starting a ground war .
These are all distinct possibilities with Donald Trump in charge .
And through all his loose talk , there 's one constant theme : demonizing Muslims and playing right into the hands of ISIS ' .
His proposal to ban 1.5 billion Muslims from even coming to our country doesn't just violate the religious freedom our country was founded on .
It 's also a huge propaganda victory for ISIS . And it alienates the very countries we need to actually help us in this fight .
A Trump presidency would embolden ISIS . We cannot take that risk .
This isn't reality television this is actual reality . And defeating global terrorist networks and protecting the homeland takes more than empty talk and a handful of slogans .
It takes a real plan , real experience , and real leadership .
Donald Trump lacks all three . And one more thing .
A president has a sacred responsibility to send our troops into battle only if we absolutely must , and only with a clear and well-thought-out strategy .
Our troops give their all . They deserve a Commander-in-Chief who knows that .
I 've worked side-by-side with admirals and generals , and visited our troops in theaters of war .
I 've fought for better health care for our National Guard , better services for our veterans , and more support for our Gold Star families .
We cannot put the lives of our young men and women in uniform in Donald Trump 's hands .
Sixth , we need to stay true to our values .
Trump says over and over again , The world is laughing at us .
He 's been saying this for decades , he didn't just start this year .
He bought full-page ads in newspapers across the country back in 1987 , when Ronald Reagan was president , saying that America lacked a backbone and the world was you guessed it laughing at us .
He was wrong then , and he 's wrong now and you 've got to wonder why somebody who fundamentally has so little confidence in America , and has felt that way for at least 30 years , wants to be our president .
The truth is , there 's not a country in the world that can rival us .
It 's not just that we have the greatest military , or that our economy is larger , more durable , more entrepreneurial than any in the world .
It 's also that Americans work harder , dream bigger and we never , ever stop trying to make our country and world a better place .
So it really matters that Donald Trump says things that go against our deepest-held values .
It matters when he says he 'll order our military to murder the families of suspected terrorists .
During the raid to kill bin Laden , when every second counted , our SEALs took the time to move the women and children in the compound to safety .
Donald Trump may not get it , but that 's what honor looks like .
And it also matters when he makes fun of people with disabilities , calls women pigs , proposes banning an entire religion from our country , or plays coy with white supremacists .
America stands up to countries that treat women like animals , or people of different races , religions or ethnicities as less human .
What happens to the moral example we set for the world and for our own children if our president engages in bigotry ?
And by the way , Mr. Trump every time you insult American Muslims or Mexican immigrants , remember that plenty of Muslims and immigrants serve and fight in our armed forces .
Donald Trump , Donald Trump could learn something from them .
That brings me to the final point I want to make today the temperament it takes to be Commander-in-Chief .
Every president faces hard choices every day , with imperfect information and conflicting imperatives .
That 's the job . A revolution threatens to topple a government in a key region , an adversary reaches out for the first time in years
what do you do ? Making the right call takes a cool head and respect for the facts .
It takes a willingness to listen to other people 's points of view with a truly open mind .
It also takes humility knowing you don't know everything because if you 're convinced you 're always right , you 'll never ask yourself the hard questions .
I remember being in the Situation Room with President Obama , debating the potential Bin Laden operation .
The President 's advisers were divided . The intelligence was compelling but far from definitive .
The risks of failure were daunting . The stakes were significant for our battle against al Qaeda and our relationship with Pakistan .
Most of all , the lives of those brave SEALs and helicopter pilots hung in the balance .
It was a decision only the president could make . And when he did , it was as crisp and courageous a display of leadership as I 've ever seen .
Now imagine Donald Trump sitting in the Situation Room , making life-or-death decisions on behalf of the United States .
Imagine him deciding whether to send your spouses or children into battle .
Imagine if he had not just his Twitter account at his disposal when he 's angry , but America 's entire arsenal .
Do we want him making those calls someone thin-skinned and quick to anger , who lashes out at the smallest criticism ?
Do we want his finger anywhere near the button ? I have a lot of faith that the American people will make the right decision .
This is a country with a deep reservoir of common sense and national pride .
We 're all counting on that . Because making Donald Trump our Commander-in-Chief would be a historic mistake .
It would undo so much of the work that Republicans and Democrats alike have done over many decades to make America stronger and more secure .
It would set back our standing in the world more than anything in recent memory .
And it would fuel an ugly narrative about who we are that we 're fearful , not confident ; that we want to let others determine our future for us , instead of shaping our own destiny .
That 's not the America I know and love . So yes , we have a lot of work to do to keep our country secure .
And we need to do better by American families and American workers and we will .
But don't let anyone tell you that America isn't great .
Donald Trump 's got America all wrong . We are a big-hearted , fair-minded country .
There is no challenge we can't meet , no goal we can't achieve when we each do our part and come together as one nation .
Every lesson from our history teaches us that we are stronger together .
We remember that every Memorial Day . This election is a choice between two very different visions of America .
One that 's angry , afraid , and based on the idea that America is fundamentally weak and in decline .
The other is hopeful , generous , and confident in the knowledge that America is great just like we always have been .
Let 's resolve that we can be greater still . That is what I believe in my heart .
I went to 112 countries as your secretary of state .
And I never lost my sense of pride at seeing our blue-and-white plane lit up on some far-off runway , with
The United States of America emblazoned on the side .
That plane those words our country represents something special , not just to us , to the world .
It represents freedom and hope and opportunity . I love this country and I know you do too .
It 's been an honor and a privilege to serve America and I 'm going to do everything I can to protect our nation , and make sure we don't lose sight of how strong we really are .
Thank you all very much . I am absolutely delighted to be back in Cleveland and to be here at the Industrial Innovation Center .
I 've had a chance to learn about the great work you 're doing .
I especially want to applaud Team Wendy for everything you do to protect our troops , first responders , and others from Traumatic Brain Injury .
It is so important that we continue to support those who protect us .
Thank you . Thank you all . It 's good to be back in Cleveland , I can tell you that .
I want to thank your extraordinary Senator , Sherrod Brown , for his leadership and for that very kind and generous introduction .
You are very fortunate to have him representing you . I want to thank your Congresswoman Marcia Fudge , who is both indomitable and indefatigable .
She is such a tenacious advocate for the people she represents .
I want to acknowledge the mayor , Mayor Jackson , who is here , County Executive Budish , and I particularly want to recognize the passing of George Voinovich .
He devoted his life to serving the people of Ohio as Mayor of Cleveland , as Governor and Senator .
And we send our prayers and sympathy to his family .
I also want to thank Dan Moore , the owner and founder of this company and Team Wendy , for his belief in Cleveland , for his commitment to create jobs .
I can't wait to work with him , to do more of what he has accomplished too .
You know , originally I had intended to come to Cleveland under very different circumstances .
We are heading into a general election that could be the most consequential of our lifetimes .
But today is not a day for politics . On Sunday , Americans woke up to a nightmare that 's become mind-numbingly familiar : Another act of terrorism in a place no one expected .
A madman filled with hate , with guns in his hands and just a horrible sense of vengeance and vindictiveness in his heart , apparently consumed by rage against LGBT Americans and by extension , the openness and diversity that defines our American way of life .
We will learn more about the killer in the days to come .
We know that he pledged allegiance to ISIS , that they are now taking credit , and that part of their strategy is to radicalize individuals and encourage attacks against the United States , even if they are not coordinated with ISIS leadership .
But there 's a lot we still don't know , including what other mix of motives drove him to kill .
The more we learn about what happened , the better we 'll be able to protect our people .
In the days ahead , we will also learn more about the many lives he viciously cut short many of them young people just starting out in their lives .
They were travel agents and pharmacy techs , college students and amusement park workers sons and daughters , brothers and
sisters and they had one thing in common : they all had a lot more to give .
We should all take a moment today , amid our busy lives , to think about them , to pray for everyone who was killed , for the wounded , those who are fighting to regain their lives and futures .
For our first responders who walked into danger one more time .
As a mother , I can't imagine what those families are going through .
Let 's also remember the other scenes we saw on Sunday :
We saw the faces of those first responders who rushed into danger to save as many people as they could .
We saw survivors like Chris Hansen who risked their lives to help others .
People gathering outside hospitals to comfort anxious family members waiting for news of their loved ones , and waiting too , to learn more about what they could do to make sure this never happened again .
Religious leaders condemning hate and appealing for peace . People lining up to donate blood .
Americans refusing to be intimidated or divided . Yesterday , I called Mayor Dyer of Orlando and offered my support and my appreciation for the leadership that he and the other officials have shown .
This is a moment when all Americans need to stand together .
No matter how many times we endure attacks like this , the horror never fades .
The murder of innocent people breaks our hearts , tears at our sense of security , and makes us furious .
Now we have to steel our resolve and respond . That 's what I want to talk to you about : how we respond .
The Orlando terrorist may be dead , but the virus that poisoned his mind remains very much alive .
We must attack it with clear eyes , steady hands , unwavering determination and pride in our country and our values .
I have no doubt we can meet this challenge if we meet it together .
Whatever we learn about this killer , his motives in the days ahead , we know already the barbarity we face from radical jihadists is profound .
In the Middle East , ISIS is attempting a genocide of religious and ethnic minorities , they are slaughtering Muslims who refuse to accept their medieval ways , they are beheading civilians , including executing LGBT people , they are murdering Americans and Europeans , enslaving , torturing , and raping women and girls .
In speeches like this one after Paris , Brussels , and San Bernardino , I have laid out a plan to defeat ISIS and the other radical jihadist groups in the region and beyond .
The attack in Orlando makes it even more clear : we cannot contain this threat we must defeat it .
The good news is that the coalition effort in Syria and Iraq has made real gains in recent months .
So we should keep the pressure on ramping up the air campaign , accelerating support for our friends fighting to take and hold ground , and pushing our partners in the region to do even more .
We also need continued American leadership to help resolve the political conflicts that fuel ISIS recruitment efforts .
But as ISIS loses actual ground in Iraq and Syria , it will seek to stage more attacks and gain stronger footholds wherever it can , from Afghanistan to Libya to Europe .
The threat is metastasizing . We saw this in Paris and we saw it in Brussels .
We face a twisted ideology and poisoned psychology that inspires the so-called lone wolves radicalized individuals who may or may not have contact and direction from any formal organization .
So yes , efforts to defeat ISIS on the battlefield must succeed .
But it will take more than that . We have to be just as adaptable and versatile as our enemies .
As president , I will make identifying and stopping lone wolves a top priority .
I will put a team together from across the entire government , as well as the private sector , and our communities to get on top of this urgent challenge .
And I 'll make sure our law enforcement and intelligence professionals have the resources they need to get the job done .
As we do this , there are three areas that demand attention .
First , we and our allies must work hand-in-hand to dismantle the networks that move money , and propaganda and arms and fighters around the world .
We have to flow we have to stem the flow of jihadists from Europe and America to Iraq , Syria , and Afghanistan and then back again .
The only way to do this is by working closely with our partners .
Strengthening our alliances , not weakening them or walking away from them .
Second , here at home , we must harden our own defenses .
We have to do more to support our first responders , law enforcement , and intelligence officers who do incredible work every day at great personal risk to keep our country safe .
I have seen first-hand how hard their job is and how well they do it .
In Orlando , at least one police officer was shot in the head .
Thankfully , his life was saved by a Kevlar helmet something folks here at Team Wendy know a lot about .
It 's often been said that our law enforcement , our intelligence agencies , and our first responders have to be right 100 percent of the time .
A terrorist only has to be right once . What a heavy responsibility .
These men and women deserve both our respect and gratitude , and the right tools , resources , and training .
Too often , state and local officials can't get access to intelligence from the federal government that would help them do their jobs .
We need to change that . We also need to work with local law enforcement and business owners on ways to protect vulnerable , so called soft targets like nightclubs and shopping malls and hotels and movie theaters and schools and houses of worship .
Now , I know a lot of Americans are asking how it was possible that someone already on the FBI 's radar could have still been able to commit an attack like the one in Orlando and what more we can do to stop this kind of thing from happening again .
Well , we have to see what the investigation uncovers .
If there are things that can and should be done to improve our ability to prevent , we must do them .
We already know we need more resources for this fight .
The professionals who keep us safe would be the first to say we need better intelligence to discover and disrupt terrorist plots before they can be carried out .
That 's why I 've proposed an intelligence surge to bolster our capabilities across the board , with appropriate safeguards here at home .
Even as we make sure our security officials get the tools they need to prevent attacks , it 's essential that we stop terrorists from getting the tools they need to carry out the attacks and that is especially true when it comes to assault weapons like those used in Orlando and San Bernardino .
I believe weapons of war have no place on our streets .
We may have our disagreements on gun safety regulations , but we should all be able to agree on a few things .
If the FBI is watching you for suspected terrorist links , you shouldn't be able to just go buy a gun with no questions asked .
You shouldn't be able to exploit loopholes and evade criminal background checks by buying online or at a gun show .
And yes , if you 're too dangerous to get on a plane , you are too dangerous to buy a gun in America .
I know some will say that assault weapons and background checks are totally separate issues having nothing to do with terrorism .
Well , in Orlando and San Bernardino , terrorists used assault weapons , the AR-15 , and they used it to kill Americans .
That was the same assault weapon used to kill those little children in Sandy Hook .
We have to make it harder for people who should not have those weapons of war .
That might not stop every shooting or terrorist attack . But it will stop some and it will save lives and it will protect our first responders .
And I want you to know I 'm not going to stop fighting for these kinds of provisions .
The third area that demands attention is preventing radicalization , and countering efforts by ISIS and other international terrorist networks to recruit in the United States and Europe .
For starters , it is long past time for the Saudis , the Qataris , the Kuwaitis and others to stop their citizens from funding extremist organizations .
And they should stop supporting radical schools and mosques around the world that have set too many young people on a path toward extremism .
We also have to use all our capabilities to counter jihadist propaganda online .
This is something I spent a lot of time on at the State Department .
As president , I will work with our great tech companies from Silicon Valley to Boston to step up our game .
We have to do a better job intercepting ISIS 's communications , tracking and analyzing social media posts , and mapping jihadist networks , as well as promoting credible voices who can provide alternatives to radicalization .
And there is more work to do offline as well .
Since 9/11 , law enforcement agencies have worked hard to build relationships with Muslim-American communities .
Millions of peace-loving Muslims live , work , and raise their families across America .
They are the most likely to recognize the insidious effects of radicalization before it 's too late , and the best positioned to help us block it .
We should be intensifying contacts in those communities , not scapegoating or isolating them .
Last year , I visited a pilot program in Minneapolis that helps parents , teachers , imams , mental health professionals , and others recognize signs of radicalization in young people and work with law enforcement to intervene before it 's too late .
I 've also met with local leaders pursuing innovative approaches in Los Angeles and other places .
We need more efforts like that , in more cities across America .
And , as the Director of the FBI has pointed out , we should avoid eroding trust in the community , which will only make law enforcement 's job more difficult .
Inflammatory , anti-Muslim rhetoric and threatening to ban the families and friends of Muslim Americans , as well as millions of Muslim business people and tourists from entering our country hurts the vast majority of Muslims who love freedom and hate terror .
So does saying that we have to start special surveillance on our fellow Americans because of their religion .
It 's no coincidence that hate crimes against American Muslims and mosques have tripled after Paris and San Bernardino .
That 's wrong and it 's also dangerous . It plays right into the terrorists ' hands .
Still , as I have said before , none of us can close our eyes to the fact that we do face enemies who use their distorted version of Islam to justify slaughtering innocent people .
They 'd take us all back to the Stone Age if they could , just as they have in parts of Iraq and Syria .
The terrorist in Orlando targeted LGBT Americans out of hatred and bigotry .
And an attack on any American is an attack on all Americans .
I want to say this to all the LGBT people grieving today in Florida and across our country : you have millions of allies who will always have your back .
And I am one of them . From Stonewall to Laramie and now Orlando , we 've seen too many examples of how the struggle to live freely , openly and without fear has been met by violence .
We have to stand together . Be proud together . There is no better rebuke to the terrorists and all those who hate .
Our open , diverse society is an asset in the struggle against terrorism , not a liability .
It makes us stronger and more resistant to radicalization . This raises a larger point about the future of our country .
America is strongest when we all believe they have a stake in our country and our future .
This vision has sustained us from the beginning the belief that yes , we are all created equal and the journey we have made to turn that into reality over our history .
That we are not a land of winners and losers .
That we all should have the opportunity to live up to our God-given potential , and we have a responsibility to help others to do so as well .
As I look at American history , I see this has always been a country of we not me .
We stand together because we are stronger together . E pluribus unum out of many , one has seen us through the darkest chapters of our history .
Even since 13 squabbling colonies put aside their disagreements and united , because they realized they were going to rise together or fall separately .
Generation after generation has fought and marched and organized to widen the circle of dignity and opportunity ending slavery , securing and expanding the right to vote , throwing open the doors of education , building the greatest middle class the world has ever seen .
We are stronger when more people can participate in our democracy .
And we are stronger when everyone can share in the rewards of our economy , and contribute to our communities .
When we bridge our divides and lift each other up , instead of tearing each other down .
We have overcome a lot together , and we will overcome the threats of terror and radicalization and our other challenges .
Here in Ohio , and all across America , I 've listened to people talk about the problems that keep them up at night .
The bonds that hold us together as communities as one national community are strained by an economy with too much inequality and too little upward mobility , by social and political divisions that have diminished our trust in each other and our confidence in our shared future .
I have heard that , and I want you to know as your president I will work every day to break down the barriers holding you back and keeping us apart .
We are going to get an economy to work for everyone , not just those at the top .
We are going to forge a new sense of connection and shared responsibility to each other and our nation .
Finally , let us remind us all , I remember how it felt on the day after 9/11 .
I 'll bet you do as well . Americans from every walk of life rallied together with a sense of common purpose on September the 12th .
And in the days and weeks and months that followed we had each other 's backs .
I was a senator from New York . There was a Republican president , a Republican governor , and a Republican mayor .
We did not attack each other we worked with each other to protect our country and to rebuild our city .
President Bush went to a Muslim community center just six days after the attacks to send a message of unity and solidarity .
To anyone who wanted to take out their anger on our Muslim neighbors and fellow citizens , he said ,
That should not and that will not stand in America .
It is time to get back to the spirit of those days .
The Spirit of 9/12 . Let 's make sure we keep looking to the best of country , to the best within each of us .
Democratic and Republican presidents have risen to the occasion in the face of tragedy .
That is what we are called to do my friends , and I am so confident and optimistic that is exactly what we will do .
Thank you all so much . I am absolutely delighted to be back in Cleveland and to be here at the Industrial Innovation Center .
I 've had a chance to learn about the great work you 're doing .
I especially want to applaud Team Wendy for everything you do to protect our troops , first responders , and others from Traumatic Brain Injury .
It is so important that we continue to support those who protect us .
Thank you . Thank you all . It 's good to be back in Cleveland , I can tell you that .
I want to thank your extraordinary Senator , Sherrod Brown , for his leadership and for that very kind and generous introduction .
You are very fortunate to have him representing you . I want to thank your Congresswoman Marcia Fudge , who is both indomitable and indefatigable .
She is such a tenacious advocate for the people she represents .
I want to acknowledge the mayor , Mayor Jackson , who is here , County Executive Budish , and I particularly want to recognize the passing of George Voinovich .
He devoted his life to serving the people of Ohio as Mayor of Cleveland , as Governor and Senator .
And we send our prayers and sympathy to his family .
I also want to thank Dan Moore , the owner and founder of this company and Team Wendy , for his belief in Cleveland , for his commitment to create jobs .
I can't wait to work with him , to do more of what he has accomplished too .
You know , originally I had intended to come to Cleveland under very different circumstances .
We are heading into a general election that could be the most consequential of our lifetimes .
But today is not a day for politics . On Sunday , Americans woke up to a nightmare that 's become mind-numbingly familiar : Another act of terrorism in a place no one expected .
A madman filled with hate , with guns in his hands and just a horrible sense of vengeance and vindictiveness in his heart , apparently consumed by rage against LGBT Americans and by extension , the openness and diversity that defines our American way of life .
We will learn more about the killer in the days to come .
We know that he pledged allegiance to ISIS , that they are now taking credit , and that part of their strategy is to radicalize individuals and encourage attacks against the United States , even if they are not coordinated with ISIS leadership .
But there 's a lot we still don't know , including what other mix of motives drove him to kill .
The more we learn about what happened , the better we 'll be able to protect our people .
In the days ahead , we will also learn more about the many lives he viciously cut short many of them young people just starting out in their lives .
They were travel agents and pharmacy techs , college students and amusement park workers sons and daughters , brothers and
sisters and they had one thing in common : they all had a lot more to give .
We should all take a moment today , amid our busy lives , to think about them , to pray for everyone who was killed , for the wounded , those who are fighting to regain their lives and futures .
For our first responders who walked into danger one more time .
As a mother , I can't imagine what those families are going through .
Let 's also remember the other scenes we saw on Sunday :
We saw the faces of those first responders who rushed into danger to save as many people as they could .
We saw survivors like Chris Hansen who risked their lives to help others .
People gathering outside hospitals to comfort anxious family members waiting for news of their loved ones , and waiting too , to learn more about what they could do to make sure this never happened again .
Religious leaders condemning hate and appealing for peace . People lining up to donate blood .
Americans refusing to be intimidated or divided . Yesterday , I called Mayor Dyer of Orlando and offered my support and my appreciation for the leadership that he and the other officials have shown .
This is a moment when all Americans need to stand together .
No matter how many times we endure attacks like this , the horror never fades .
The murder of innocent people breaks our hearts , tears at our sense of security , and makes us furious .
Now we have to steel our resolve and respond . That 's what I want to talk to you about : how we respond .
The Orlando terrorist may be dead , but the virus that poisoned his mind remains very much alive .
We must attack it with clear eyes , steady hands , unwavering determination and pride in our country and our values .
I have no doubt we can meet this challenge if we meet it together .
Whatever we learn about this killer , his motives in the days ahead , we know already the barbarity we face from radical jihadists is profound .
In the Middle East , ISIS is attempting a genocide of religious and ethnic minorities , they are slaughtering Muslims who refuse to accept their medieval ways , they are beheading civilians , including executing LGBT people , they are murdering Americans and Europeans , enslaving , torturing , and raping women and girls .
In speeches like this one after Paris , Brussels , and San Bernardino , I have laid out a plan to defeat ISIS and the other radical jihadist groups in the region and beyond .
The attack in Orlando makes it even more clear : we cannot contain this threat we must defeat it .
The good news is that the coalition effort in Syria and Iraq has made real gains in recent months .
So we should keep the pressure on ramping up the air campaign , accelerating support for our friends fighting to take and hold ground , and pushing our partners in the region to do even more .
We also need continued American leadership to help resolve the political conflicts that fuel ISIS recruitment efforts .
But as ISIS loses actual ground in Iraq and Syria , it will seek to stage more attacks and gain stronger footholds wherever it can , from Afghanistan to Libya to Europe .
The threat is metastasizing . We saw this in Paris and we saw it in Brussels .
We face a twisted ideology and poisoned psychology that inspires the so-called lone wolves radicalized individuals who may or may not have contact and direction from any formal organization .
So yes , efforts to defeat ISIS on the battlefield must succeed .
But it will take more than that . We have to be just as adaptable and versatile as our enemies .
As president , I will make identifying and stopping lone wolves a top priority .
I will put a team together from across the entire government , as well as the private sector , and our communities to get on top of this urgent challenge .
And I 'll make sure our law enforcement and intelligence professionals have the resources they need to get the job done .
As we do this , there are three areas that demand attention .
First , we and our allies must work hand-in-hand to dismantle the networks that move money , and propaganda and arms and fighters around the world .
We have to flow we have to stem the flow of jihadists from Europe and America to Iraq , Syria , and Afghanistan and then back again .
The only way to do this is by working closely with our partners .
Strengthening our alliances , not weakening them or walking away from them .
Second , here at home , we must harden our own defenses .
We have to do more to support our first responders , law enforcement , and intelligence officers who do incredible work every day at great personal risk to keep our country safe .
I have seen first-hand how hard their job is and how well they do it .
In Orlando , at least one police officer was shot in the head .
Thankfully , his life was saved by a Kevlar helmet something folks here at Team Wendy know a lot about .
It 's often been said that our law enforcement , our intelligence agencies , and our first responders have to be right 100 percent of the time .
A terrorist only has to be right once . What a heavy responsibility .
These men and women deserve both our respect and gratitude , and the right tools , resources , and training .
Too often , state and local officials can't get access to intelligence from the federal government that would help them do their jobs .
We need to change that . We also need to work with local law enforcement and business owners on ways to protect vulnerable , so called soft targets like nightclubs and shopping malls and hotels and movie theaters and schools and houses of worship .
Now , I know a lot of Americans are asking how it was possible that someone already on the FBI 's radar could have still been able to commit an attack like the one in Orlando and what more we can do to stop this kind of thing from happening again .
Well , we have to see what the investigation uncovers .
If there are things that can and should be done to improve our ability to prevent , we must do them .
We already know we need more resources for this fight .
The professionals who keep us safe would be the first to say we need better intelligence to discover and disrupt terrorist plots before they can be carried out .
That 's why I 've proposed an intelligence surge to bolster our capabilities across the board , with appropriate safeguards here at home .
Even as we make sure our security officials get the tools they need to prevent attacks , it 's essential that we stop terrorists from getting the tools they need to carry out the attacks and that is especially true when it comes to assault weapons like those used in Orlando and San Bernardino .
I believe weapons of war have no place on our streets .
We may have our disagreements on gun safety regulations , but we should all be able to agree on a few things .
If the FBI is watching you for suspected terrorist links , you shouldn't be able to just go buy a gun with no questions asked .
You shouldn't be able to exploit loopholes and evade criminal background checks by buying online or at a gun show .
And yes , if you 're too dangerous to get on a plane , you are too dangerous to buy a gun in America .
I know some will say that assault weapons and background checks are totally separate issues having nothing to do with terrorism .
Well , in Orlando and San Bernardino , terrorists used assault weapons , the AR-15 , and they used it to kill Americans .
That was the same assault weapon used to kill those little children in Sandy Hook .
We have to make it harder for people who should not have those weapons of war .
That might not stop every shooting or terrorist attack . But it will stop some and it will save lives and it will protect our first responders .
And I want you to know I 'm not going to stop fighting for these kinds of provisions .
The third area that demands attention is preventing radicalization , and countering efforts by ISIS and other international terrorist networks to recruit in the United States and Europe .
For starters , it is long past time for the Saudis , the Qataris , the Kuwaitis and others to stop their citizens from funding extremist organizations .
And they should stop supporting radical schools and mosques around the world that have set too many young people on a path toward extremism .
We also have to use all our capabilities to counter jihadist propaganda online .
This is something I spent a lot of time on at the State Department .
As president , I will work with our great tech companies from Silicon Valley to Boston to step up our game .
We have to do a better job intercepting ISIS 's communications , tracking and analyzing social media posts , and mapping jihadist networks , as well as promoting credible voices who can provide alternatives to radicalization .
And there is more work to do offline as well .
Since 9/11 , law enforcement agencies have worked hard to build relationships with Muslim-American communities .
Millions of peace-loving Muslims live , work , and raise their families across America .
They are the most likely to recognize the insidious effects of radicalization before it 's too late , and the best positioned to help us block it .
We should be intensifying contacts in those communities , not scapegoating or isolating them .
Last year , I visited a pilot program in Minneapolis that helps parents , teachers , imams , mental health professionals , and others recognize signs of radicalization in young people and work with law enforcement to intervene before it 's too late .
I 've also met with local leaders pursuing innovative approaches in Los Angeles and other places .
We need more efforts like that , in more cities across America .
And , as the Director of the FBI has pointed out , we should avoid eroding trust in the community , which will only make law enforcement 's job more difficult .
Inflammatory , anti-Muslim rhetoric and threatening to ban the families and friends of Muslim Americans , as well as millions of Muslim business people and tourists from entering our country hurts the vast majority of Muslims who love freedom and hate terror .
So does saying that we have to start special surveillance on our fellow Americans because of their religion .
It 's no coincidence that hate crimes against American Muslims and mosques have tripled after Paris and San Bernardino .
That 's wrong and it 's also dangerous . It plays right into the terrorists ' hands .
Still , as I have said before , none of us can close our eyes to the fact that we do face enemies who use their distorted version of Islam to justify slaughtering innocent people .
They 'd take us all back to the Stone Age if they could , just as they have in parts of Iraq and Syria .
The terrorist in Orlando targeted LGBT Americans out of hatred and bigotry .
And an attack on any American is an attack on all Americans .
I want to say this to all the LGBT people grieving today in Florida and across our country : you have millions of allies who will always have your back .
And I am one of them . From Stonewall to Laramie and now Orlando , we 've seen too many examples of how the struggle to live freely , openly and without fear has been met by violence .
We have to stand together . Be proud together . There is no better rebuke to the terrorists and all those who hate .
Our open , diverse society is an asset in the struggle against terrorism , not a liability .
It makes us stronger and more resistant to radicalization . This raises a larger point about the future of our country .
America is strongest when we all believe they have a stake in our country and our future .
This vision has sustained us from the beginning the belief that yes , we are all created equal and the journey we have made to turn that into reality over our history .
That we are not a land of winners and losers .
That we all should have the opportunity to live up to our God-given potential , and we have a responsibility to help others to do so as well .
As I look at American history , I see this has always been a country of we not me .
We stand together because we are stronger together . E pluribus unum out of many , one has seen us through the darkest chapters of our history .
Even since 13 squabbling colonies put aside their disagreements and united , because they realized they were going to rise together or fall separately .
Generation after generation has fought and marched and organized to widen the circle of dignity and opportunity ending slavery , securing and expanding the right to vote , throwing open the doors of education , building the greatest middle class the world has ever seen .
We are stronger when more people can participate in our democracy .
And we are stronger when everyone can share in the rewards of our economy , and contribute to our communities .
When we bridge our divides and lift each other up , instead of tearing each other down .
We have overcome a lot together , and we will overcome the threats of terror and radicalization and our other challenges .
Here in Ohio , and all across America , I 've listened to people talk about the problems that keep them up at night .
The bonds that hold us together as communities as one national community are strained by an economy with too much inequality and too little upward mobility , by social and political divisions that have diminished our trust in each other and our confidence in our shared future .
I have heard that , and I want you to know as your president I will work every day to break down the barriers holding you back and keeping us apart .
We are going to get an economy to work for everyone , not just those at the top .
We are going to forge a new sense of connection and shared responsibility to each other and our nation .
Finally , let us remind us all , I remember how it felt on the day after 9/11 .
I 'll bet you do as well . Americans from every walk of life rallied together with a sense of common purpose on September the 12th .
And in the days and weeks and months that followed we had each other 's backs .
I was a senator from New York . There was a Republican president , a Republican governor , and a Republican mayor .
We did not attack each other we worked with each other to protect our country and to rebuild our city .
President Bush went to a Muslim community center just six days after the attacks to send a message of unity and solidarity .
To anyone who wanted to take out their anger on our Muslim neighbors and fellow citizens , he said ,
That should not and that will not stand in America .
It is time to get back to the spirit of those days .
The Spirit of 9/12 . Let 's make sure we keep looking to the best of country , to the best within each of us .
Democratic and Republican presidents have risen to the occasion in the face of tragedy .
That is what we are called to do my friends , and I am so confident and optimistic that is exactly what we will do .
Thank you all so much . Thank you . Hello .
Thank you , thank you so much . Thank you .
Thank you all . I have to say , pink never looked so good .
I want to thank my friend , and your courageous leader , Cecile Richards .
Cecile really is the definition of grace under pressure . She has proven that time and time again over the course of her career , particularly over the last few years .
She really is like another great American , her mother , Ann Richards , who was a friend of mine , and I just wish Ann were here to see this election .
She 'd have Donald Trump tweeting double time . We reached a milestone together this week .
Thanks to you , and people all over our country , for the first time , a woman will be a major party 's nominee for President of the United States .
And yesterday , I had the great honor of being endorsed by President Obama and Vice President Biden .
And by Senator Elizabeth Warren . So it 's been a big week .
And there 's nowhere I 'd rather end it than right here , with the Planned Parenthood Action Fund .
I 'm grateful to the entire Planned Parenthood family . You made this campaign your own .
Whether you knocked on doors in Iowa or rallied in California , this victory belongs to all of you .
It belongs to the one thousand young activists who came together in Pittsburgh last month to get organized .
It belongs to the staff , the donors , and to the providers .
Providers like Dr. Amna Dermish in Texas , who called out Donald Trump when he said women should be punished for having abortions .
And the open letter she wrote defending her patients ' right to make their own health decisions should be required reading for every politician in America .
I am deeply conscious of the reality that this victory belongs to generations of brave women and men who fought for the radical idea that women should determine our own lives and futures .
And it belongs to the women and men who continue to fight for that idea today , even in the face of threats and violence .
When a man who never should have had a gun killed three people at Planned Parenthood in Colorado Springs , leaders in this room voted unanimously to keep health centers across America open the next day .
The CEO , the CEO of Planned Parenthood Rocky Mountains made a promise to patients in Colorado and beyond when she said : Our doors and our hearts
stay open . ' That is really what Planned Parenthood is all about .
So today , I want to say something you don't hear often enough : thank you .
Thank you for being there for women , no matter their race , sexual orientation , or immigration status .
Thank you for being there for Natarsha McQueen in Brooklyn , who told me how Planned Parenthood caught her breast cancer when she was just 33 years old , and saved her life .
Thank you for being there for college students getting STD testing .
The young people who have the tough questions that they 're afraid to ask their parents .
The sexual assault survivors who turn to Planned Parenthood for compassionate care .
The transgender teens who come for an appointment and find the first place where they can truly be themselves .
Thank you for being there for your communities whether that means taking on hostile politicians in Louisiana or handing out clean drinking water in Flint , Michigan .
And thank you for being there for every woman in every state who has to miss work ; drive hundreds of miles sometimes ; endure cruel , medically unnecessary waiting periods ; walk past angry protesters to exercise her constitutional right to safe and legal abortion .
I 've been proud to stand with Planned Parenthood for a long time .
And as president , I will always have your back .
Because I know for a century , Planned Parenthood has worked to make sure that the women , men , young people who count on you can lead their best lives
healthy , safe and free to follow their dreams . Just think when Planned Parenthood was founded , women couldn't vote or serve on juries in most states .
It was illegal even to provide information about birth control , let alone prescribe it .
But people marched and organized . They protested unjust laws and , in some cases , even went to prison .
And slowly but surely , America changed for the better .
51 years ago this week , thanks to a Planned Parenthood employee named Estelle Griswold , the Supreme Court legalized birth control for married couples across America .
When I used to teach law , and I would point to this case , a look of total bewilderment would come across my students ' faces .
And not long after that , Roe v . Wade guaranteed the right to safe , legal abortion .
So young women were no longer dying in emergency rooms and back alleys from botched , illegal abortions .
And this is a fact that is not often heard , but I hope you will repeat it : America 's maternal mortality rate dropped dramatically .
And it turns out , being able to plan their families not only saved women 's lives , it also transformed them because it meant that women were able to get educations , build careers , enter new fields , and rise as far as their talent and hard work would take them all the opportunities that follow when women are able to stay healthy and choose whether and when to become mothers .
And you know so well , today , the percentage of women who finish college is six times what it was before birth control was legal .
Women represent half of all college graduates in America and nearly half our labor force .
And our whole economy , then , is better off .
The movement of women into the workforce , the paid workforce , over the past 40 years was responsible for more than three and a half trillion dollars in growth in our economy .
And here 's another fact that doesn't get much attention : unintended pregnancy , teen pregnancy , and abortion rates are at all time record lows .
That reality and studies confirm what Planned Parenthood knew all along : Accurate sex education and effective , affordable contraception work .
And , it wasn't so long ago , Republicans and Democrats could actually stand together on these issues .
Back in the 90s , when I helped create the National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy , I worked with Republicans to get it done .
Now things feel quite a bit different now , don't they ?
Instead of working to continue the progress we 've made , Republicans , led now by Donald Trump , are working to reverse it .
When Donald Trump says , Let 's make America great again , ' that is code for let 's take America backward . '
Back to a time when opportunity and dignity were reserved for some , not all .
Back to the days when abortion was illegal , women had far fewer options , and life for too many women and girls was limited .
Well , Donald , those days are over . We are not going to let Donald Trump or anyone else turn back the clock .
And that means we 've got to get to work .
Because as you know better than anyone , right now , across the country , rights that women should be able to take for granted are under attack .
Any day now , the Supreme Court will rule on the Texas law that imposes burdensome and medically unnecessary requirements on abortion providers .
If these restrictions are allowed to stand , 5.4 million women of reproductive age will be left with about 10 health centers that provide abortion in a state the size of France .
It is the biggest challenge to Roe v . Wade in a generation .
It 's also yet another reminder of what 's at stake on the Supreme Court .
President Obama has done his job , and nominated Merrick Garland to be the ninth justice .
It 's time for Senate Republicans to do their job .
The Senate should give Judge Garland the hearing he deserves .
Now , meanwhile , in just the first three months of 2016 , states across the country introduced more than 400 restrictions on abortion .
11 states have defunded Planned Parenthood in the last year , cutting some women off from their only health care provider .
And of course , on a national level , Republicans in Congress have been willing to shut down the entire federal government over Planned Parenthood funding .
Have you ever noticed that the same politicians who are against sex education , birth control , and safe and legal abortion , are also against policies that would make it easier to raise a child like paid family leave ?
They are for limited government everywhere except when it comes to interfering with women 's choices and rights .
Well I 'm here today to tell you we need to be just as determined as they are .
We need to defend Planned Parenthood against partisan attacks . If right-wing politicians actually cared as much about protecting women 's health as they say they do , they 'd join me in calling for more federal funding for Planned Parenthood .
We also need to fight back against the erosion of reproductive rights at the federal , state , and local levels , and ensure that patients and staff can safely walk into health centers without harassment or violence .
We need to , we need to stand up for access to affordable contraception , without interference from politicians or employers .
And let 's invest in long-acting reversible contraceptives , so every woman can choose the method that is best for her .
Let 's strengthen and improve the Affordable Care Act , which covers 20 million Americans and saves women millions of dollars through no-copay preventive care .
Let 's take action to stop the spread of the Zika virus , which threatens the health of children and pregnant women .
Let 's repeal laws like the Hyde Amendment that make it nearly impossible , make it nearly impossible for low-income women , disproportionately women of color , to exercise their full reproductive rights .
And , it is worth saying again : defending women 's health means defending access to abortion not just in theory , but in reality .
We know that restricting access doesn't make women less likely to end a pregnancy .
It just makes abortion less safe . And that then threatens women 's lives .
For too long , issues like these have been dismissed by many as women 's issues ' as though that somehow makes them less worthy , secondary .
Well , yes , these are women 's issues . They 're also family issues .
They 're economic issues . They 're justice issues . They 're fundamental to our country and our future .
Beyond these specific issues , we need to keep working to support women and families in other ways by getting incomes rising , including the minimum wage , which disproportionately affects women ; we need to finally guarantee equal pay for women 's work ; we need to pass comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship that keeps families together ; and we need to break down all the barriers of discrimination and systemic racism that hold too many Americans back .
We need to come together to stop the epidemic of gun violence that is stalking our country .
No parent should live in fear that their child will be hurt or killed by gun violence .
33,000 Americans are killed every year . I 've met so many mothers on this campaign who have lost their own children .
We owe it to them to protect our kids no matter what ZIP code they live in .
And that is going to require standing up to the gun lobby and making this a voting issue .
All the issues we 're talking about today are connected .
They intersect . And that 's why I 'm grateful to the reproductive justice leaders in this room and across America .
Because you know that all those issues go straight to that fundamental question : whether we believe women and families of all races and backgrounds and income levels deserve an equal shot in life .
Now that 's what I believe and you won't be surprised to hear
Donald Trump believes something very different . He actually thinks guaranteeing paid family leave would leave America less competitive .
He says if women want equal pay , we should just and this is a quote
do as good a job ' as men as if we weren't already .
He wants to appoint justices who want to overturn Roe V . Wade .
He of course wants to defund Planned Parenthood . And he wants to go after so many of the fundamental rights we have , including safe and legal abortions .
And he actually said , women should be punished for having abortions . '
Now , once he said that there was an outcry , as there should have been , and he tried to walk back his comments .
He 's doing that a lot lately . But anyone who would so casually agree to the idea of punishing women like it was nothing to him , the most obvious thing in the world
that is someone who doesn't hold women in high regard .
Because if he did , he 'd trust women to make the right decisions for ourselves .
But don't worry . Donald assures us that , as President , he 'll be and I quote again the best for women . '
Anyone who wants to defund Planned Parenthood , and wipe out safe , legal abortion has no idea what 's best for women .
And after all this is a man who has called women pigs , ' dogs , ' and disgusting animals . ' Kind of hard to imagine counting on him to respect our fundamental rights ?
When he says pregnant women are an inconvenience ' to their employer , what does that say about how he values women our work , our contributions ?
We 're in the middle of a concerted , persistent assault on women 's health across our country .
And we have to ask ourselves and ask everyone we come in contact with : Do we want to put our health , our lives , our futures in Donald Trump 's hands ?
Now , these questions aren't hypothetical . Every woman and everyone who cares about women will answer them when they vote in November .
When I talk like this , Donald Trump likes to say I 'm playing the woman card . '
And I like to say , if fighting for equal pay , Planned Parenthood , and the ability to make our own health decisions is playing the woman card , then deal me in .
Now my friends , I come to this issue , of course as a woman , a mother , and a grandmother now .
But I also come to it as a former First Lady , Senator , and Secretary of State .
And in those roles , in those roles , I traveled to parts of the world where girls are married off as soon as they are old enough to bear children .
Places where the denial of family planning consigns women to lives of hardship .
I visited countries where governments have strictly regulated women 's reproduction either forcing women to have abortions or forcing women to get pregnant and give birth .
Everything I have seen has convinced me that life is freer , fairer , healthier , safer , and far more humane when women are empowered to make their own reproductive health decisions .
And everything I 've heard from Donald Trump , often seems to echo other leaders who have a very different view of women .
The late , great Maya Angelou said : When someone shows you who they are , believe them the first time . '
Donald Trump has shown us who he is . And we sure should believe him .
It 's not just on reproductive rights . Donald Trump would take us in the wrong direction on so many issues we care about economic justice , workers ' rights , civil rights , human rights , the environment all of that is on the line in this election .
When Donald Trump says a distinguished judge born in Indiana can't do his job because of his Mexican heritage , or mocks a reporter with disabilities , or denigrates Muslims and immigrants , it goes against everything we stand for .
He does not see all Americans as Americans . So this election isn't about the same old fights between Democrats and Republicans .
They 'll be there , don't worry . But this election is profoundly different .
It 's about who we are as a nation . It 's about millions of Americans coming together to say : We are better than this .
So here 's my promise to you today : I will be your partner in this election and over the long haul .
Together , we are taking on the attacks and together we 'll come out stronger just like Planned Parenthood has , time and again .
And together we 're going to unify our country , stop Donald Trump , and fight for an America where we lift each other up , instead of tearing each other down .
We 're not just going to break that highest and hardest glass ceiling .
We 're going to break down all the barriers that hold women and families back .
We 're stronger when every family in every community knows they 're not on their own .
We are stronger together and we are going to make history again in November .
Thank you all so , so much . Hello ! Thank you .
Thank you so much . Thank you all . It is so great to be back in Pittsburgh .
And it is especially great to be here with the men and women of the IBEW .
I want to thank Mike Dunleavy and IBEW Local 5 for welcoming us to your house .
We are happy to be here . And , I want to thank my longtime friend , colleague , advocate , Leo Gerard , who has been a champion , not just for steelworkers , but for working people fairness , the kind of economy that lifts everybody up , for as long as I 've known him .
I am so grateful to have the support of the steelworkers and IBEW .
It means a lot to me because we want to put you all to work .
We 're going to have a lot of work to do in our country and nobody can do it better .
I want to recognize your County Executive , Rich Fitzgerald , and thank him for being such a great supporter , but , more than that , leading this county along with Mayor Bill Peduto , who has done such a great job to continue the renaissance of Pittsburgh .
I want to join Leo in acknowledging your great Congressman Mike Doyle and your great Senator Bob Casey .
There 's another mayor here , Mayor John Fetterman . John is here .
John is hard to miss , so he 's here somewhere !
I saw him somewhere earlier . I want to thank also City Councilwoman Natalia Rudiak , and I want to thank Josh Shapiro , your candidate for Attorney General , and a Montgomery County Commissioner , Reverend James Edward Brown , and , all of you for being with us today .
I always love coming to Pittsburgh and western Pennsylvania , and it 's especially great to be here after the Penguins clinched the Stanley Cup again !
It 's great , quite a record now . They 've got some ways to go before they match the Steelers in terms of winning it all but they 're on their way .
The County Executive and I were talking , and he said something that really struck me .
The Penguins did this the old fashion way : teamwork , hard work , and resilience .
And that 's what we 're going to do in this election .
That 's what we 're going to do in our country .
When I planned this trip , I intended to give a different talk today .
About how we make our economy work for everyone , not just those at the top , how do we reduce the economic inequality that 's threatening not just our economy , but our democracy .
How we rebuild our infrastructure , stand with our steelworkers against illegal dumping by China .
And I wanted to talk too about how unions like yours , IBEW , and the steelworkers , and so many others , helped build the greatest middle class in the world .
If anybody has a chair you can use it because don't worry , the folks behind you have sat down and everybody is seated .
That 's great . You see , I draw from our history that labor is central to whatever we want to achieve .
I 'm going to be a strong partner and advocate for the American labor movement , for working people , for your rights and your opportunities to make the very best possible living in the greatest country on earth .
These are the issues that are in my heart . I will be talking about them in the weeks ahead .
They 're really at the center of my campaign . But today , there are different things on my mind and probably on yours , too , as Leo said .
We are all still reeling from what happened on Sunday in Orlando .
Another terrorist attack not overseas , but here at home .
So many Americans killed and wounded . A hate crime at an LGBT nightclub , right in the middle of Pride Month .
The deadliest mass shooting in the history of the United States .
The losses stretch all the way to Pennsylvania . Two of the victims were from this state .
Akyra Murray , a high school basketball star from Philadelphia , was killed ; she was just 18 years old .
And her friend Patience Carter , also from Philadelphia , was shot .
It 's a poignant reminder that even in a country as big as ours , we are all connected .
And our hearts are with Patience and Akyra 's families , and all the families who are grieving now .
Since Sunday , we 've been trying to make sense of what happened , and what we can do together to prevent future attacks .
Yesterday in Cleveland , I once again laid out my plan for defeating ISIS and the broader radical jihadist movement , around the world and online and for combating radicalization here at home , including a special focus on detecting and preventing so-called
lone wolf ' attacks like we saw in Orlando and San Bernardino .
These attacks are carried out by individuals who may or may not have any direct contact with an organization like ISIS , but are inspired , primarily over the internet , by its twisted ideology .
I reemphasized the importance of working with Muslim communities here at home , who are often the most likely to recognize radicalization before it 's too late .
After the attacks in Paris , Brussels and San Bernardino , I met with homeland security officials and Muslim community leaders in Minneapolis and Los Angeles , to hear their ideas for building stronger partnerships .
We need to lift up voices of moderation and tolerance .
I also said something I 've been saying from the very beginning of this campaign : I believe we Americans are capable of both protecting our Second Amendment rights while making sure guns don't fall into the wrong hands .
The terrorist in Orlando was the definition of the wrong hands . '
And weapons of war have no place in our streets .
So the questions being debated this week about how we deal with the threat of terrorism are some of the most charged and important issues we face .
And there are bound to be differences of opinion . In a country as diverse and complex as ours , I think that 's a given .
But I believe that despite those differences , on a deeper level , we are all on the same team .
We may not see eye to eye on everything , but we are all Americans .
And there is so much more that unites us than divides us .
I have said many times , I think it 's appropriate for us , not to consider ourselves on the Republican team or the Democratic team , on the red team or the blue team , but to be on the American team .
And after a terrible event , like Orlando , that 's clearer than ever .
That 's what we 're seeing in Orlando and across America people of different faiths , backgrounds , sexual orientations , and gender identities coming together to say with one voice , we won't let hate defeat us .
If we can count on that kind of unity and solidarity from each other if even the families of the Orlando victims are speaking out right now against hate and division we should certainly expect that from our leaders .
And I am sorry to say that is not what we are hearing from Donald Trump .
Donald Trump wants to be our next Commander in Chief .
I think we all know that is a job that demands a calm , collected , and dignified response to these kinds of events .
Instead , yesterday morning , just one day after the massacre , he went on TV and suggested that President Obama is on the side of the terrorists .
Just think about that for a second . Even in a time of divided politics , this is beyond anything that should be said by someone running for President of the United States .
And I have to ask will responsible Republican leaders stand up to their presumptive nominee ?
Or will they stand by his accusation about our President ?
I am sure they would rather avoid that question altogether .
But history will remember what we do in this moment .
What Donald Trump is saying is shameful . It is disrespectful to the people who were killed and wounded , and their families .
And it is yet more evidence that he is temperamentally unfit and totally unqualified to be Commander in Chief .
Of course , he is a leader of the birther movement , which spread the lie that President Obama wasn't born in the United States .
I guess he had to be reminded Hawaii is part of the United States .
This is the man who claimed a distinguished federal judge born and raised in Indiana can't do his job because of his quote Mexican heritage . '
I guess he has to be reminded Indiana is in the United States .
So maybe we shouldn't be surprised . But it was one thing when he was a reality TV personality .
You know , raising his arms and yelling , you 're fired .
It is another thing altogether when he 's the Republican Party 's presumptive nominee for president .
Americans don't need conspiracy theories and pathological self-congratulations . We need leadership , common sense and concrete plans .
Because we are facing a brutal enemy . In the Middle East , ISIS is attempting a genocide of religious and ethnic minorities .
They 're slaughtering Muslims who refuse to accept their medieval ways .
They are beheading civilians , including executing LGBT people ; murdering Americans and Europeans ; enslaving , torturing , and raping women and girls .
The barbarity we face from radical jihadists is profound . So I would like to have a worthy debate on the best way to keep our country safe .
That 's what Americans deserve . I read every word of Donald Trump 's speech yesterday .
And I sifted through all the bizarre rants and the outright lies .
What I found , once you cut through the nonsense , is that his plan comes down to two things .
First , he is fixated on the words radical Islam . '
I must say , I find this strange . Is Donald Trump suggesting that there are magic words that , once uttered , will stop terrorists from coming after us ?
Trump , as usual , is obsessed with name-calling . From my perspective , it matters what we do , not just what we say .
In the end , it didn't matter what we called bin Laden
it mattered that we got bin Laden . I have clearly said that we face terrorist enemies who use a perverted version of Islam to justify slaughtering innocent people .
We have to stop them , and we will . So if Donald suggests I won't call this threat what it is , he hasn't been listening .
But I will not demonize and declare war on an entire religion .
Now that we 're past the semantic debate , Donald is going to have to come up with something better .
He 's got one other idea . He wants to ban all Muslims from entering our country .
And now he wants to go even further , and suspend all immigration from large parts of the world .
I 've talked before about how this approach is un-American .
It goes against everything we stand for as a country founded on religious freedom .
But it is also dangerous . First , we rely on partners in Muslim countries to fight terrorists ; this would make it harder .
Second , we need to build trust in Muslim communities here at home to counter radicalization ; and this would make it harder .
Third , Trump 's words will be , in fact they already are , a recruiting tool for ISIS to help increase its ranks of people willing to do what we saw in Orlando .
And fourth , he 's turning Americans against Americans , which is exactly what ISIS wants .
Leaders who 've actually fought terrorists know this . General Petraeus said recently that
demonizing a religious faith and its adherents ' will come at a great cost , not just to our values but to our men and women in uniform and our national security .
Commissioner Bill Bratton of the New York Police Department said this kind of talk makes his job harder .
He has Muslims in his police force , he has Muslims in the community , he needs everybody working together against any potential threat .
But Donald won't listen to any of this . Not experts like General Petraeus or Commissioner Bratton , because he says he knows more about ISIS than the generals do .
It 's almost hard to think of what to say about that claim .
But in this instance , Donald 's words are especially nonsensical .
Because the terrorist who carried out this attack wasn't born in Afghanistan , as Donald Trump said yesterday .
He was born in Queens just like Donald was himself .
So Muslim bans and immigration reforms would not have stopped him .
They would not have saved a single life in Orlando .
Those are the only two ideas Donald Trump put forward yesterday for how to fight ISIS .
Beyond that , he said a lot of false things , including about me .
He said I 'll abolish the Second Amendment . Well , that 's wrong .
He said I 'll let a flood of refugees into our country without any screening .
That 's also wrong . These are demonstrably lies . But he feels compelled to tell them because he has to distract us from the fact that he has nothing substantive to say for himself .
Much of the rest of his speech was spent denigrating not just the President , but the efforts of all the brave American service members , law enforcement agents , intelligence officers , diplomats and others who have worked so hard to keep our country safe .
Donald says our military is a disaster and the world is laughing at us .
Wrong again . Since 9/11 , America has done a great deal at home and abroad to stop terrorists .
Thousands of Americans have fought and died . We have worked intensively with our allies , engaged in fierce and vital debates here at home about how far our government should go in monitoring threats .
We have vastly increased security measures at airports , train stations , power plants and many other places .
And the American people , we have all become more vigilant , even while we have carried on living our lives as normally as possible .
It has been a long and difficult effort . We 've had successes , and we 've also had failures .
But one thing 's for sure : the fight against terrorism has never been simple .
We need a Commander-in-Chief who is up to these challenges who can grapple with them in all their complexity
someone with real plans and real solutions that actually address the problems we face .
And we need someone with the temperament and experience to make those hard choices in the Situation Room not a loose cannon who could easily lead us into war .
One more thing . Donald Trump has been very clear about what he won't do .
He won't stand up to the gun lobby . The terrorist who killed 49 people and wounded 53 others in Orlando did it with two guns : a handgun and a Sig Sauer MCX rifle .
If you don't know what that is , I urge you to Google it .
See it for yourself . This man had been investigated by the FBI for months .
But we couldn't stop him from buying a powerful weapon that he used to slaughter Americans in large numbers .
Let 's get this straight . We have reached the point where people can't board planes with full bottles of shampoo but people being watched by the FBI for suspected terrorist links can buy a gun with no questions asked .
That is absurd . It just seems like western Pennsylvania common sense , if you 're too dangerous to get on a plane , you 're too dangerous to buy a gun .
Enough is enough . Now is time for seriousness and resolve .
We need to go after ISIS overseas , we need to protect Americans here at home , counter their poisonous ideologies , support our first responders , take a hard look at our gun laws and we need to stand with the LGBT community and peaceful Muslim Americans , today and always .
In the days and weeks ahead , I will have more to say about how we will work together to keep our country and our citizens safe and take the fight to the terrorists .
None of this will be easy . And none of it will be helped by anything that Donald Trump has to offer .
This is a time to set aside fear and division , and reach for unity .
America is strongest when we all feel like we have a stake in our country .
When we all have real chance to live up to our God-given potential , and we want others here to have that chance , too .
We 've always been a country of we , ' not me . '
And we 've always been stronger together . We are stronger when people can participate in our democracy , share in the rewards of our economy , and contribute to our communities .
When we bridge our divides and lift each other up , instead of tearing each other down .
Here in Pennsylvania and across America , I have listened to so many people tell me about the problems that keep you and your families up at night .
Despite all the progress we 've made , there 's not yet enough growth , which creates good jobs and raises incomes .
There 's not yet enough economic fairness , so that everyone who works hard can share in the rewards .
We need both a growth and fairness ' economy .
Where profits and paychecks rise together . So many people have talked to me about how the bonds that hold us together as one national community are strained by too much inequality , too little upward mobility , social and political divisions that have diminished our trust in each other and our confidence in our shared future .
As your president , I will work every day to break down all the barriers holding you back and keeping us apart .
And I will be on your side . I 'll have the back of every steelworker getting knocked around by unfair competition .
Of every working mom trying to raise her kids on minimum wage or unequal pay .
Of every union member struggling to keep going in the face of concerted attacks on workers ' rights because right to work ' is wrong for workers , and we need to stand strong with unions .
Together , I want us to forge a new sense of connection and a shared responsibility to each other and our nation .
I know that 's possible , because I have seen it throughout our history including just this week .
Some of you may have noticed a letter that went viral on the internet over the past few days .
The letter is from George H.W. Bush 's presidential library .
I hadn't read it in a long time until yesterday .
And it moved me to tears , just like it did all those years ago .
It 's the letter that President Bush left in the Oval Office for my husband , back in January of 1993 .
They had just fought a fierce campaign . Bill won , President Bush lost .
In a democracy , that 's how it goes . But when Bill walked into that office for the very first time as President , that note was waiting for him .
It had some good advice about staying focused on what mattered , despite the critics .
It wished him happiness . And it concluded with these words :
You will be our President when you read this note .
I wish you well . I wish your family well .
Your success is now our country 's success . And I am rooting hard for you .
George . ' That 's the America we love . That is what we cherish and expect .
So let us come together , we can disagree without being disagreeable , we can root for each other 's success .
Where our President is everyone 's President , and our future belongs to us all .
Let 's make this once again the big-hearted , fair-minded country we all know and love .
Thank you all very much . Thank you , It 's great to be back in Raleigh !
Thank you so much . I have to confess I was having such a good time backstage listening to the 120 Minutes Band , listening to Mary Wingate do the national anthem and just being absolutely transported by Shay Taylor and Friends , the gospel group that got us all going today .
And I cannot thank a better twosome than the people you just saw up here .
Because I honestly believe Jim Hunt is not only one of the best governors North Carolina has ever had , but one of the best governors ever in America in the last years .
And what he did to really put North Carolina on a path to the future has stood the test of time .
We 've had a few glitches with others who don't seem to understand what the ingredients are for building an economy that works for everyone , not just those at the top .
But Jim Hunt knows that . I look forward to continuing to work with him .
And I was so delighted to have a chance , as I did , to have Alicia Wilkerson talk about her journey , how hard she has worked , raising her children , getting an education , making it possible for her to have a better future .
I so greatly appreciate her mentioning the SCHIP program which has helped 8 million kids every year get health insurance .
Now because we are in North Carolina and we have a lot of friends here I want to acknowledge some of them .
Your Secretary of State Elaine Marshall . Senator Dan Blue , the Minority Leader of the North Carolina Senate .
Representative Larry Hall , the Democratic leader of the North Carolina House of Representatives .
Linda Coleman running for Lieutenant Governor . Judge Mike Morgan running against a Republican Supreme Court incumbent .
And don't forget than Dan Blue III is running for State Treasurer .
Josh Stein , running for Attorney General . And let 's give a big round of applause to your next governor , Attorney General Roy Cooper !
Your next AG commissioner Walter Smith and your next United States Senator , Debra Ross .
We 're going to work hard in the this election to elect as many Democrats up and down the ticket so that North Carolina can get back on the path to the path to the future , get off this detour that you 've been on .
I have to start by saying if you notice anything different about me today , it could be that now I have double the grandmother glow .
This past weekend , Chelsea and Marc had a little boy and we 're all totally over the moon about it .
Obviously , our family will do everything we can to make sure little Charlotte and now little Aidan grow up with every possible opportunity .
I know that 's what every parent and grandparent , aunt or uncle , godmother and godfather , people who care about the children in our lives , that 's exactly how we all feel .
I believe with all my heart that you should not have to be the grandchild of a former president or secretary of state to have every opportunity available to you in this country .
Every single child deserves the chance to live up to his or her God-given potential and that has been the cause of my life .
It 's rooted in the values I learned from my family and my faith .
We 're all in this together . And we have a responsibility to lift each other up .
As we Methodists say : Do all the good you can to all the people you can in all the ways you can .
And that is absolutely true for our children . That 's why I got into public service in the first place .
And it 's why I 'm determined that we will win this election .
I think it 's an understatement to say that Americans face a choice in November .
As I said yesterday in Ohio , Donald Trump offers no real solutions for the economic challenges we face he just continues to spout reckless ideas that will run up our debt and cause another economic crash .
I 'm here today to offer an alternative . I have a clear vision for the economy , and it 's this : We need to make sure our economy works for everyone , not just those at the top .
Not just for the rich or the well-connected , not just for people living in some parts of the country , or people from certain backgrounds and not others I mean everyone .
I have a plan to get us there : Five steps we can take together to drive growth that 's strong , fair , and lasting .
Growth that reduces inequality , increases upward mobility ; that reaches into every corner of our country .
The measure of our success will be how much incomes rise for hardworking families .
How many children are lifted out of poverty . How many Americans can find good jobs that support a middle class life and not only that , jobs that provide a sense of dignity and pride .
That 's what it means to have an economy that works for everyone , not just those at the top .
That 's the mission , and I 'm asking all of you to join me in it .
We have to overcome some big challenges . I will admit that .
First , too many of our representatives in Washington are in the grips of a failed economic theory called trickle-down economics .
I do not question their sincerity , but it has been proven wrong again and again .
But there are still people in Congress who insist on cutting taxes for the wealthy instead of investing in our future .
They careen from one self-inflicted crisis to another shutting down the government , threatening to default on our national debt , refusing to make the commonsense investments that used to have broad bipartisan support , like rebuilding our roads and our bridges , our tunnels , our highways and airports , or investing in better education from zero through high school and college .
I like to look at evidence : I plead to that .
I think evidence is important when making decisions that affect other people 's lives .
If the evidence were there to support this ideology , I would have to acknowledge that , but we have seen the results .
Twice now in the past 30 years a Republican president has caused an economic mess and a Democratic president has had to come in and clean it up .
And yes , too many special interests and too many lobbyists have stood in the way of progress while protecting the perks of the privileged few .
It 's not just Washington . Too many corporations have embraced policies that favor hedge funds and other big shareholders and top management at the expense of their workers , communities , and even their long-term value .
They 're driven by Wall Street 's obsession with shor t-t erm share prices and quarterly earnings .
A recent survey of corporate executives found that more than half when asked would hold off on making a successful long-term investment maybe in their workers , or plant equipment , or research if it meant missing a target in the next earnings report .
So corporations stash cash overseas or they send it to top shareholders in the form of stock buybacks or dividends , instead of raising wages or investing in research and development .
This pressure , this shor t-t erm pressure , leads to perverse incentives and outrageous behavior .
It is wrong to take taxpayer dollars with one hand and give out pink slips with the other hand .
And no company should be moving their headquarters overseas , just to avoid paying their taxes here at home .
In addition , there have been big changes in how American families live , learn , and work , but our policies haven't kept up .
There are so many examples of this . Over the past several decades , women have entered the workforce and boosted our economy , yet we are the only , the only developed country that doesn't provide paid family leave of any kind .
We 're asking families to rely on an old system of supports in a new economic reality .
No wonder so many are struggling . The bottom line is that too many leaders in business and government have lost sight of our shared responsibility to each other and to our nation .
They let Wall Street take big risks with unregulated financial activities , they skew our tax code toward the wealthy , they failed to enforce our trade rules , they undermined workers ' rights .
They have forgotten that we are all in this together and we are at our best when we recognize that .
Excessive inequality such as we have today reduces economic growth .
Markets work best when all the stakeholders share in the benefits .
The challenges we face are significant . It is not easy to change Washington , or how corporations behave .
It takes more than stern words or a flashy slogan it takes a plan .
It takes experience and the ability to work with both parties to get results .
That means we need a president who knows what we 're up against , has no illusions about what we need to do to move ahead , but can actually get it done .
And that is what I am offering . Because there is good news .
The good news is that everywhere I go , smart , determined men and women are working hard to reverse these trends .
Mayors are pioneering innovative ways to work with the private sector to invest in their cities .
Entrepreneurs and small businesses are building and hiring in places that bigger companies have abandoned .
Unions are providing training programs that add value to the companies that employ their members .
Union pension funds are already investing in infrastructure projects that have supported more than 100,000 jobs here in our country .
So do not grow weary , there are great ideas out there .
And we are going to be partners in a big , bold effort to increase economic growth and distribute it more fairly .
To build an economy that works for everyone , not just those at the top .
I believe the federal government should adopt five ambitious goals :
First , let 's break through the dysfunction in Washington to make the biggest investment in new , good-paying jobs since World War II .
Second , let 's make college debt-free for all . And transform the way we prepare Americans for the jobs of the future .
Third , let 's rewrite the rules so more companies share profits with their employees , and fewer ship profits and jobs overseas .
Finally , let 's make sure that Wall Street , corporations , and the super-rich pay their fair share of taxes .
And all of this depends upon putting our families first and matching our policies to how you actually live and work in the 21st century .
Briefly about these four points : Let 's start with jobs .
Every American willing to work hard should be able to find a job that pays enough to support a family .
And I know we can do this because I 've seen it in the past .
You know , I remember when I was growing up and America had come out from the upheaval of depression and world war .
Our leaders worked together to invest in a new foundation for American power and prosperity .
Highways to connect up our entire nation . College and housing for returning veterans and their families .
Unprecedented scientific research . And it worked we built the greatest middle class the world has ever known .
Now , we have to get as ambitious again . There is nothing we can't do .
Let 's be just as ambitious to build our 21st century American economy to produce the same results for hard working Americans .
In my first 100 days as president , I will work with both parties to pass a comprehensive plan to create the next generation of good jobs .
Now the heart of my plan will be the biggest investment in American infrastructure in decades , including establishing an infrastructure bank that will bring private sector dollars off the sidelines and put them to work here .
And I 've talked with local leaders around America and I 've seen the dire need for investment .
In Tampa , for example , I saw how a smart , targeted highway investment near a major port can create thousands of good-paying jobs , support the local economy and unlock national commerce .
We can create millions of good-paying jobs while preparing America to compete and win in the global economy .
So let 's set these big national goals . And I know how important it is to rebuild our roads , our bridges and our airports , but we have more work to do .
Let 's build better . And let 's connect every household to broadband by the year 2020 .
Let 's build a cleaner , more resilient power grid with enough renewable energy to power every home in the country .
Let 's fix failing water systems like the one that poisoned children in Flint , Michigan .
Let 's renovate our public schools so every child in every community has access to safe , high-tech classrooms , laboratories , and libraries .
Our 100 Days jobs package will also include transformational investments in key drivers of growth :
Advance manufacturing , so we can make it in America and compete and win in the global economy .
Making America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century , which will create millions of jobs and help protect our planet .
Recommitting to scientific research , which can create new whole industries , just like we did in the ' 90s , when we started mapping the human genome .
And small businesses , which should be the engine for creating new jobs across America , they need to be free of red tape and they need to have access to credit .
We need to slash unnecessary regulations making it easier to get startup capital from community banks and credit unions .
If you have an idea for a small business , we want you to get started .
Let 's free entrepreneurs to do what they do best innovate and grow and hire and make sure that the new service and caregiving jobs being created today are jobs that pay well , too .
And that does mean raising the national minimum wage . So many of these are so personal to us that they need to be respected and lifted up .
And I know too that we 've got work to do to stand with those who are fighting for raising the minimum wage .
It 's not always how we think about this , but I can tell you another engine for growth and job creation would be comprehensive immigration reform .
It will bring millions of workers into the formal economy so you don't have an unlevel playing field , so that workers who are competing for those jobs don't get undercut because employers go out and find undocumented workers to do those jobs for a lower wage .
I really believe it 's not just the right thing to do , but it will be great .
It will be smart for our economy . I want people to be able to compete .
I don't want to have that disadvantage that exists in too many places , where people are being are being priced out of the jobs they 've always done .
So we can work toward a full employment and full potential economy .
That does mean we can't ignore people that are still stuck on the sidelines , or working par t-t ime when what they really want is a full-time job .
Or those trapped in long-term joblessness , whether they 're veterans , workers with disabilities , people coming home from prison , or young people who tried to start their careers in the midst of the Great Recession .
I particularly want young people to feel that they are going to get good jobs that will give them that ladder of opportunity that they deserve to have in America .
That 's why I want to expand incentives like the New Markets Tax Credit , Empowerment Zones , and other ideas that bring business , government , and communities together to create good jobs in poor or remote areas .
Places that have lost a factory or a mine where generations of families used to work .
Anyone willing to work should get the help they need to qualify for and find that good job .
That means breaking down the barriers of systemic racism and discrimination that hold back those barriers , they hold back African Americans , Latinos , Asian and Native Americans , and women from fully participating in our economy .
We need to reverse the long-term neglect that has dried up jobs and opportunity in communities of color , in poor communities .
It 's not by accident that the unemployment rate now among black Americans is twice as high as among whites .
Back in the ' 90s , we were closing that gap
, incomes were going up for everybody . I think we 're going to have to invest money to create jobs for young people because right now I 'm worried that if young people don't get that first job when they are young , learn about work , understand the obligations as well as the promise of work , it will be even more difficult to get them into the workforce later on .
It is way past time for us to guarantee equal pay for women , which is still not the reality .
So , you see it is not enough to have an affirmative agenda , we have to knock down those barriers .
And by the way , as you 've seen here in North Carolina discriminating against LGBT Americans is bad for business .
And make no mistake , we will defend American jobs and American workers by saying no to bad trade deals and unfair trade practices , including the Trans-Pacific Partnership , which does not meet my high bar for creating good-paying jobs .
No to assaults on the right to organize and bargain collectively .
No to every attack on the dignity of working families .
We 're going to make this economy work for everyone , and it 's time we start building this from the ground up .
For every home and every community all the way to Washington .
Now , I know very well that if you don't have the skills for the jobs of tomorrow , it 's going to be difficult .
Education is still the pathway for greater opportunities for many Americans .
Let 's start at the beginning with making quality , affordable child care and preschool available in every community in the next 10 years , so we get our littlest Americans off to the best start .
Jim Hunt was a pioneer in this . Why did he care so much about children zero to five , besides the fact that he cared about them ?
Because he knew there was a direct line to how the youngest children were treated , educated , and prepared for school , and what kind of jobs and economic competitiveness North Carolina would have .
So we 're going to start by having families be their child 's first teachers , and we 're going to give them the support they need to do that .
And when it comes to primary and secondary education I pledged to you we 're going to make sure all our kids have good teachers and good schools , no matter what ZIP code you live in .
You know , for many years , thanks to people and leaders like Jim Hunt , North Carolina was a leading state when it came to education .
Now , unfortunately , thanks to your Governor McCrory and the legislature , the average teacher salary can barely support a family .
It should not be a surprise that thousands have quit in recent years .
We should support our teachers , not scapegoat them . And then let 's make sure every student has options after high school .
Whether it 's a four-year degree , free community college , an apprenticeship , or other forms of higher education , we need to provide the skills and credentials that match the job openings of today and tomorrow .
That 's why I 'm proposing new tax credits to encourage more companies to offer paid apprenticeships that lets you earn while you learn .
And I will to support the union apprenticeships and training programs already out there .
Not every good job requires a four-year college degree . We need to dignify skills training .
So many young people have the talent and the will to succeed they just need a helping hand .
That 's why I want us to come together to help our young people break free from the burden of student debt .
I 'm sure we all have stories . I 've met so many who told me they can't start a business .
They can't even move out of their parent 's basement because of all the student debt holding them back .
Let 's set the goal to make debt-free college available to everyone .
So future students won't have to borrow a dime to pay for tuition at public college or university .
And let 's liberate the millions of Americans who already have student debt by making it easier to refinance , just like a mortgage .
Let 's make it easier to have debt forgiven by doing national service , let 's make it easier to repay what you owe as a portion of your income so you never have to pay more than you can afford .
I 've set out a way to do this , and we 'll be talking more about it as we go forward in this campaign .
My third goal is to rewrite the rules so more companies share profits with employees , and fewer ship profits and jobs overseas .
I know there are a lot of businesses thriving here in North Carolina and across our country who see employees as assets to invest in , not costs to cut .
They 're building companies , not stripping them . They 're creating good jobs , not eliminating them .
But too many , too many businesses take the opposite view .
I 'm not asking corporations to be more charitable , although I think that is important .
I 'm asking corporations to realize that when more Americans prosper , they prosper too , right ?
When your paycheck grows , America grows . We are a 70 percent consumption economy .
If we want higher growth , we have to raise incomes .
So people have more disposable dollars to be able to spend , instead of holding back out of fear of what will happen .
So let 's bring a long-term view back to board rooms and executive suites .
Let 's restore the link between productivity growth and wage growth .
As president , I will make it a national priority for more companies to share profits with employees .
On top of , not instead of , good wages .
Let 's recognize the people doing the work , putting in the hours , they 're the ones who should be sharing the rewards .
We should continue to crack down on wage theft and make overtime count , so companies that pay well can't be undercut by competitors paying poverty wages .
I believe we should strengthen unions , which have formed the bedrock of a strong middle class .
It should be easier to bargain collectively . That 's not only fair , it makes workers more productive , it strengthens our economy .
And let 's close the loopholes that help companies ship jobs and profits overseas .
Let 's make companies that outsource jobs to other countries pay back the tax breaks they received while they were here in America .
And if corporations try to move their headquarters to a foreign country to skip out on their tax let 's slap a new exit tax on them and then put that money to work in the communities left behind .
And we should extend the rules that were passed in Dodd-Frank on Wall Street after the crisis and strengthen them both for the big banks and the shadow banking system .
And I will veto any reforms to repeal those rules and vigorously enforce the law , with accountability , so Wall Street can never wreck Main Street again .
Fourth , let 's make sure Wall Street , corporations , and the super-rich pay their fair share of taxes .
When people say the game is rigged , the best evidence is the tax code .
It 's riddled with scams , loopholes , and special breaks , like the carried-interest loophole that lets some hedge fund managers pay a lower tax rate than a teacher or a nurse .
That 's not only unfair , it 's bad economics , and we 're going to stop it .
I have been saying that for years . As president , if Congress won't act , I will ask the Treasury Department to use its authority to close that loophole .
And here 's another idea that I will be pushing : Let 's pass the so-called Buffett Rule so top executives can't pay a lower rate than their secretaries .
And let 's ask the wealthiest Americans to pay more including a new tax on multimillionaires .
That 's not only the right thing to do , it 's smart for our economy .
Because these steps will help pay for the investments we need in jobs and education without increasing our national debt .
In fact , every program I have proposed in this campaign , I tell you how I will pay for it .
Donald Trump and I disagree on a lot of things , and one of them is simple math .
Finally , here 's our fifth goal : Let 's put families first and make sure our policies match how you actually work and live in the 21st century .
Families look a lot different today than they did 30 years ago , and so do our jobs .
The movement of women into the workforce has produced enormous economic growth over the past few decades .
But with women now the sole or primary breadwinner in a growing number of there 's more urgency than ever to make it easier for Americans to be good workers , good parents , and good caregivers , all at the same time .
The old model of work where you could expect to hold a steady job with good benefits for an entire career , is long gone .
People in their 20s and 30s have come of age in an economy that 's totally different .
And a lot of young parents are discovering just how tough that is on families .
Many people now have wildly unpredictable schedules , or they cobble together par t-t ime work , or they 've tried to go independent .
Flexibility can be good , but you shouldn't have to worry that your family could lose your health care or retirement savings just because you change jobs or start a small business .
Why do you think every other I have to ask why do you think every other advanced country has paid family leave ?
Do you think they are just unrealistic , or do you think that they have figured out they can have a stabler economy , they can support families ?
And that 's what I want us to do . Working families need predictable scheduling , earned sick days and vacation days , quality affordable childcare and healthcare .
These are not luxuries . They 're economic necessities . In today 's economy , benefits should be flexible , portable , and comprehensive for everyone .
That means it 's time to expand Social Security as well .
Especially , especially for older women who are widowed , or have taken time out of the workforce to care for a loved one , and who are suffering financially because of that .
We need to look to a secure retirement for everyone , and to provide families relief from crushing costs and health care , housing , and prescription drugs .
I looked at the numbers and in some states , two parents earning the minimum wage have to spend up to 35 percent of their income on child care .
For a single parent , it could be 70 percent .
So I will set a goal : Families shouldn't have to pay more than 10 percent of their income for child care .
And I will repeat today what I have said throughout this campaign : I will not raise taxes on the middle class I will give you tax relief to raise these burdens .
Now , you know whenever I talk about these family issues , Donald Trump says I 'm playing the woman card .
Right ? Well you know what I say , if fighting for child care and paid leave and equal pay is playing the woman card , then deal me in .
Here 's what I want you to understand . It may be difficult to imagine all this getting done and Washington is so broken , I get that but I really think that progress is possible or I would not be standing up here running to be president of the United States .
I know Republicans and Democrats can work together , because I 've done it .
As you heard Alicia say , I helped create the Children 's Health Insurance Program when I was first lady .
That happened with support with both parties . And it now it covers 8 million kids and when you go to get health care for your child , nobody says ,
Are you a Republican or Democrat ? They say ,
What does your child need ? I worked with Republicans many times when I was a senator from New York and as secretary of state , so I know we can get results that will make real differences in people 's lives .
I know however it 's rare . There 's no question that we need to make Washington work much better than it does today .
And that means in particular : getting unaccountable money out of our politics .
One of the reasons this election is so important is because the Supreme Court stands in the balance .
We need to overturn that terrible Supreme Court decision , Citizens United
, and then go a lot further to reform our whole campaign finance system .
This is about our democracy but it 's also about our economy .
Campaign finance reform and reducing the power of special interests is directly relevant to getting Washington working for the people again making the right investments , putting your jobs and your economic security first .
That 's why I 'm so passionate about this issue , and I 'm will fight hard to end the stranglehold that the wealthy and special interests have on so much of our government .
So , let 's do this together . A historic investment in jobs .
Debt-free college . Profit sharing . Making those at the top pay their fair share .
Putting families first in our modern economy . And a democracy where working people 's voices are actually heard .
That is what we are fighting for in this election .
As I said during the primary I am a progressive who likes to get things done and we can do this .
Just for a minute , compare what I am proposing to what we hear from Donald Trump .
The self-proclaimed King of Debt has no real ideas for making college more affordable or addressing the student debt crisis .
He has no credible plan for rebuilding our infrastructure , apart from his wall .
He has no real strategy for creating jobs , just a string of empty promises .
Maybe we shouldn't expect better from someone whose most famous words are ,
You 're fired . Well , here 's what I want you to know : I do have a jobs program .
And as president , I 'm going to make sure you hear ,
You 're hired . Here 's the bottom line : Economists left , right , and center all agree Donald Trump will drive America back into recession .
Just this week , one of Senator John McCain 's former economic advisors said Trump 's policies would wipe out , wipe out three-and-a-half million jobs .
His tax cuts tilted toward the wealthy would add more than $30 trillion to our national debt over the next 20 years .
That is just astonishing and it 's no wonder that the Economist Intelligence Unit , one of the leading firms that analyzes the top threats to the global economy , now ranks a Trump presidency No .
3 , right behind problems in China and volatility in the commodities markets .
Look , I know Donald Trump hates it when anyone points out how hollow his sales pitch really is .
I guess my speech yesterday must have gotten under his skin because right away he lashed out on Twitter with outlandish lies and conspiracy theories , and he did the same in his speech today .
Now think about it . He 's going after me personally because he has no answers on the substance .
In fact , he doubled down on being the King of Debt .
So all he can do is try to distract us .
That 's even why he 's attacking my faith , sigh .
And of course attacking a philanthropic foundation that saves and improves lives around the world .
It 's no surprise he doesn't understand these things . The Clinton Foundation helps poor people around the world get access to life-saving AIDS medicine .
Donald Trump uses poor people around the world to produce his line of suits and ties .
Here in North Carolina , you know as well as anyone that our economy is already too unpredictable for working families .
We can't let Donald Trump bankrupt America the way he bankrupted his casinos .
We need to write a new chapter in the American Dream and it can't be Chapter 11 .
Please , join me in this campaign , I 'm offering a very different vision .
We 're stronger together . We 're stronger when we grow together .
We 're stronger when our economy works for everyone , not just those at the top .
I am convinced that if we work hard if we go into November with the confidence and optimism that should be the American birthright , we will not only win an election , we will chart the course to the future that we want and deserve .
Thank you and God bless you . Whoa ! I 'll tell you what , that is an introduction second to none .
I am so delighted to be here with all of you .
This is the 61st Annual Fight for Freedom Fund Dinner .
I remember very well when my husband attended this event back in 2000 , the final year of his presidency , Dr. Anthony .
He came home , he could not stop talking about it .
He said , They call it a dinner but let me tell you , it is so much more than a dinner .
I saw that for myself four years later when I joined you as a Senator representing New York .
And I 'm grateful to be invited back because , yes , this is so much more than a dinner .
It 's a celebration . It 's a revival . It 's a giant community meeting with people from all over the world .
It 's a movement . And you 're right , it only happens in one place : right here in Detroit , Michigan .
And I loved Reverend Anthony 's words for what does happen here every year , not just this dinner but a weekend-long issue-tainment .
It 's not just entertainment . It 's not just talking about issues .
It 's both . I think America could use a little issue-tainment because there 's so much we need to talk with each other about .
We 've got to figure out how we 're going to work together , like you had all those young people come in here and march around , literally representing their ancestry from every place in the world .
I 'd like to bottle that spirit . Because if we can enjoy ourselves while we are trying to roll up our sleeves and work together and keep going for our communities and our country , we will be all the better off .
So I want to thank the Freedom Fund dancers and the great speakers for their magnificent interpretation of Langston Hughes 's poem ,
Let America Be America Again . They were wonderful .
Thank you for sharing that with all of us . I 'm delighted to be here with so many distinguished elected leaders , clergy members , business and union leaders and so many people from not just Detroit , not just Michigan , but literally across our country .
I want to thank all the elected officials . I 'm particularly pleased to have this chance also to congratulate all of the award winners , starting with Congressman Clyburn , who is a deserving recipient of the Lifetime Achievement Award .
And I want to also recognize Senator Goeff Hansen for his award this evening ; Mary Sheffield ; Ivy Bailey ; Shaka Senghor ; and Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Jefferson .
These are extraordinary Americans who deserve the recognition that you have given to them .
I got to admit , though , after that introduction in that typical low-key I 'm a little bit worried I am going to shirk .
Because I 've got to say , you 've got me all worked up about what we can do together based on [ ] .
And I want to start where the Langston Hughes poem took us .
I appreciate the chance to hear that poem with new ears .
I 've read it many times . But as with all great works , there 's always something new to discover .
And for me , what stands out tonight is that line right at the start .
Let America be that great , strong land of love .
That is more than poetry , my friends , that 's a prayer .
It 's one I hope we all try to carry in our hearts every day , especially in this wild political season .
This election represents such a critical choice for America . Yes , of course , it 's a choice between different candidates , different parties , different platforms , and visions for America 's future .
But I think it 's also a choice about something even more fundamental .
It 's about unity versus division , compassion versus selfishness , and love versus hate .
The stakes don't get much higher than that . So we 've got to do everything we can to convince Americans to make the right choice .
America has come a long way over the past eight years and I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for everything he 's done to [ ] economy and make life better for American families .
And no one knows that better than Detroit . Look at what 's happening across this great city .
In Midtown and Eastern Market , Southwest Detroit , buses are running , new businesses are opening , families are moving in .
There 's a palpable feeling of pride and progress , Mayor .
And meanwhile , the auto industry just had its best year ever .
I think it was a pretty good investment America made in saving the auto industry and giving the auto companies , the UAW and the autoworkers a chance to show that Americans can compete and win .
Innovation is on the rise across Michigan the clean energy sector , the defense corridor and so much else .
So day by day and week by week , the people of Detroit and Michigan are doing what you 've always done , making and designing things that America needs and the world wants .
But we can't be satisfied until the economic revitalization we 're seeing in some of Detroit 's neighborhoods is felt in all of Detroit 's neighborhoods .
We can't be satisfied until every parent has a good-paying job and every grandparent has a secure retirement .
We can't be satisfied until all of Detroit 's children are learning in good schools with good teachers in every classroom and no crumbling ceilings or mold or rats scurrying across the floor .
And we can't be satisfied until all of Michigan 's families have clean water to drink and bathe in .
We know what happened in Flint is unacceptable . We 've got to make sure that kind of disregard for the lives of children and families is never allowed to happen anywhere else ever again .
I 'm grateful to Mayor Weaver and the leaders in Flint for their leadership , their shining that bright light .
We 're working together to make sure America can't ignore the families of Flint and to put young people to work helping distribute [ ] broken pipes .
And President Obama 's visit this week will help to bring even greater attention to what is needed .
I 've said this many times in many places . There are too many Flints in America .
Places where the water that children are drinking is not safe , where they air they breathe is not clean .
We cannot get distracted , not until all of our children have what they deserve in every community across our country that has been left out and left behind .
Now , these are challenges of politics and policy , of course .
But they really all do come down to our hearts .
Do we believe that all of our kids are worthy of the best we have to offer .
Do we believe that all Americans deserve to be treated with dignity and respect ?
Or do we think that some children are less worthy , some families less valuable , some people less than because of their race , religion , income , gender , identity or some other ugly excuse ?
In other words , do we want America to be a place where , as Langston Hughes put it , equality is in the air we breathe ?
Or should we hold fast to what he called that same old stupid plan of dog eat dog , of mighty crush the weak ?
Well , I believe and I think everyone here at this dinner it 's time we put that same old plan to rest once and for all .
That is how we will let America be America again .
I 'm running for president because I want to knock down all the barriers holding Americans back barriers of poverty and injustice , of unequal access to health care and education , unequal treatment under the law , unequal inclusion in our democracy .
Let 's knock them all down and build ladders of opportunity in their place that all of our people can climb .
Let 's make it possible for everyone to rise together and share in the promise of America .
And to do that , we need to face up to a painful reality .
More than half a century after Rosa Parks sat and Dr. King marched and John Lewis bled , race still plays a significant role in determining who gets ahead in America and who gets left behind .
And that is not news to anyone here . Many of you know that better than I .
But I want you to know I get it and I see it .
And it 's important we have this conversation . For many white Americans , it 's tempting to believe that systemic racism is largely behind us .
After all , that would leave us with a whole lot less work to do , wouldn't it ?
But anyone asking for your vote has a responsibility to see things as they actually are , not as we wish them to be .
Something is wrong when the median wealth for black families is a tiny fraction of that for white families .
Something is wrong when gun violence is by far the leading cause of death for young [ ] the next nine leading causes of death combined .
Something is wrong when young black kids are arrested for petty crimes while white kids who do the same things aren't .
And when black men are far more likely to be stopped by the police , charged with crimes , and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men convicted of the same offenses .
Something is wrong when so many black parents are burying their children .
Imagine if white kids were 500 percent more likely to die from asthma than black kids .
Imagine if a white baby in parts of this country was twice as likely to die before her first birthday than a black baby .
Imagine the outcry [ ] that would flood in to save those children .
These inequities are wrong , they 're immoral , they 're un-American , and they have to end .
That 's why I 'm proposing a new comprehensive commitment to equity in opportunity for all communities in America .
Real plans to create jobs . Hundreds of billions of dollars in new investments in cities like Detroit , including 20 billion aimed specifically at jobs for young people .
Because the unemployment rate is way too high in too many places .
We 've got to close that gap . We need to support home ownership .
It 's always been one of the surest ways for families to build wealth .
And we need a real plan [ ] expanding access to capital to support entrepreneurs and small businesses , especially minority- and women-owned small businesses .
They are the fastest growing businesses in America . And while we 're at it , let 's finally ensure equal pay for women .
Now , that would benefit women across the board , but particularly women of color , and lift up a lot of families .
So making these commitments requires tackling the crisis of unequal access to education .
Our schools are more segregated than they were in 1968 .
We 've got to reverse that . It 's dangerous .
We need a good school with a good teacher in the classroom for every child no matter [ ] that child lives in .
And we 've got to make sure if you want to go to college , you can afford to go to college and not be held back by the lack of funds .
I 've got a plan so no one would have to borrow a dime to go to a public college or university .
And we 're going to help the millions of young people pay off the debt they already have .
And I want to give special support to historically black colleges and universities because they 've produced some of the finest leaders in American history .
They 're still doing it today , often against great odds .
So we need to do all of this , and we also need reform end-to-end reform in our criminal justice system .
The first policy speech I gave in this campaign over a year ago was about criminal justice reform .
We have seen the toll on families torn apart by excessive incarceration , children growing up in homes shattered by prison and poverty .
Let 's get back to that fundamental principle : everyone in every community benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone is respected by the law .
That means not just acknowledging but fixing the crisis of mass incarceration .
Let 's eliminate the disparity in sentencing between crack and powder cocaine .
Let 's end racial profiling . These are things I fought for as a Senator ; I will fight for them as president .
We are going to dismantle the school-to-prison pipeline and create a cradle-to-college pipeline in its place .
We 're also going to do more to help people [ ] to society .
They need a second chance . They should have the opportunity to get it .
Let 's ban the box . Let 's give people a fair shot at competing for jobs .
Let 's invest in job training and housing so people trying to do the right thing have a real shot at rebuilding their lives .
And let 's return the vote to everyone who has paid his or her debt to society .
If America is really a country that believes in second chances , let 's start acting like it .
And let 's end the tragedy of African Americans being killed by incidents involving the police , by learning from police departments doing the right things and applying those lessons across our country .
Let 's make sure the Justice Department has the resources to hold departments accountable when they get it wrong .
I 've had the great privilege of getting to know the Mothers of the Movement who have lost children to gun violence or encounters with the police .
I 've sat with them . I 've listened to them as they 've talked about their children and their families .
And I 've seen how they support each other . Women who would never have met except for the unimaginable happening to them .
They are members of a club no one ever wants to join , but they 're channeling their grief into action .
They are fighting to make sure other mothers ' children don't die like theirs did .
If they are willing to turn their mourning into a movement , we can join that movement .
Stand with them . Call for common sense reforms to reduce gun violence .
Take on the gun lobby . Don't let them continue to not take responsibility for their actions .
We 've got to end the epidemic of gun violence and make sure that we don't lose any more of our young people .
You know , after the campaign is over and the lights are off , we have got to follow through on all of this .
I want you to hold me accountable . I want you to know what I intend to do and then to keep saying ,
Well , how are you doing ? How are you doing , President ?
Are we getting it done ? I want to work with your elected officials .
I want to work with the clergy . I want to work with business .
I want to work with all of you . We are going to tackle these problems .
And we have got to make sure people turn out and vote in order to be able to do that .
So let 's make sure we get the vote heard and convince people to actually exercise that franchise , to knock down the barriers standing in the way , making it harder for people to vote .
I am very confident that we can come together to make this campaign one that will bring people together , that will unify our country , that will make it possible for us not just to campaign but to govern .
I am not new to these fights . As you heard from Reverend Anthony , I have been doing this for a long time , standing up to injustice , especially on behalf of our kids .
That 's always been my North Star , ever since I went to work for Marian Wright Edelman at the Children 's Defense Fund .
So I know that this is not easy . I know it doesn't happen because we say it , we campaign on it .
No politician should show up at election time and say the right things and think that 's enough .
Anybody asking for a vote should show you what their commitment is and what they will do to right the wrongs that plague our great country .
We 've got some candidates in this race who are trying to divide us .
We 've got some candidates in this race who are stoking hatred and inciting violence .
We 've got some candidates in this race who are trying to set Americans against one another .
We 've got some candidates in this race who act as though Americans have no memory .
So hold all of us accountable . Ask the hard questions .
We deserve leaders who will tear down barriers , not build walls between us .
And we need to be sure that as we go forward in this campaign , we look out mostly for those left out and left behind .
I 'm asking all Americans to join in this . Systemic racism , intergenerational poverty , gun violence : these aren't somebody else 's problems .
These are our problems . These aren't urban problems . These are American problems .
You prove every day that progress really does take a village .
So let 's make sure we act on that . We have a saying in my campaign , Love trumps hate .
And I think that 's exactly what we have to do .
We have to demonstrate what that poem asked us to do .
We have to remember the lessons from scripture . We have to look at our great country .
Look at this amazing gathering : people from every background , every race , every religion coming together as one people , one nation .
There is no other place like it in the world .
I went to 112 countries as your secretary of state .
There is no place like America . Let 's not endanger the promise , the potential , the dream of our country by giving in to these voices of hatred .
Instead , let us remind ourselves of how far we have come together .
It was a tremendous honor to serve in President Obama 's administration .
Now America is deciding who will succeed him . The leading Republican contender is the man who led the insidious birther movement to discredit the President 's citizenship .
And when he was asked in a national television interview to disavow David Duke and other white supremacists who are supporting his campaign , he played coy .
We cannot let Barack Obama 's legacy fall into Donald Trump 's hands .
We can't let all the hard work and progress we have achieved over the last seven and a half years be torn away .
We have to move forward together . We have to bring our country together .
We have to keep working toward that more perfect union .
That mission feels more urgent than ever now that the Obama presidency is coming to a close .
We have been blessed to have this strong , thoughtful leader sitting in the Oval Office , an exceptional First Lady by his side .
They have made us proud . They have represented America to the world with style and grace .
And it is up to us to make sure that when they leave the White House , the concerns and priorities they championed , the hopes and dreams that Americans have entrusted to them don't also leave .
So here is my promise to you : If I am fortunate enough to be president , I am going to keep fighting to tear down all those barriers holding back every American .
My door will always be open . My administration will look like America .
You will always have a friend and a partner in the White House .
But I need your help , your wisdom , and your prayers in this campaign and then every day afterwards .
There will be some difficult days ahead for our country , for this great city .
But , as scripture tells us , let us not grow weary doing good for in due season , we shall reap if we do not lose heart .
And if we need inspiration , we can look to our history .
Harriet Tubman is in the news these days . She is finally getting some of the acclaim she so richly deserves .
I was proud to help to make her homestead in New York a national treasure to work to support the work that she has done that lives on .
Now , remember , among her many acts of extraordinary courage was leading slaves to freedom along the underground railroad .
And she had just one instruction for those entrusted in her care : Keep going .
She 'd say , If you hear the dogs , keep going .
If you see the torches in the woods , keep going .
If there 's shouting after you , keep going . Don't ever stop .
Keep going . If you want a taste of freedom , keep going .
So , my friends , let 's keep going together .
Let 's organize and mobilize and make sure that love trumps hate once and for all .
Thank you , and God bless you . I am absolutely delighted and so honored to be here and I thank Immigrant Action for this endorsement .
But more than that , I thank you for your advocacy , for your strong , consistent voice on behalf of immigrants and immigrants ' families and immigrants ' aspirations .
And I enjoyed working with you in the Senate for eight years and if I am so fortunate enough to be President , I would certainly look forward to working with you again .
I want to thank 1199 SEIU for hosting this event here today .
They too are strong advocates for the immigrant community and represent many immigrants as well .
And it 's always a pleasure to be here with the Speaker .
Melissa , as we already said is a strong voice on many things , but has been especially focused on making clear that the elected leadership here in the City of New York , a city built by immigrants in a nation built by immigrants , will always have a strong , consistent representation in our elected officials and thank you so much , Madam Speaker .
I also thank you for everything you do , and I want to also thank Assembly Member Michaelle Solages who , I was just told , is the first Haitian American elected in the State Assembly in New York .
I will have the opportunity in a few minutes to hear from our panelists who , as Steven said , represent the immigrant experience in New York .
From many parts of the world , first and second generation , they are really on the front lines .
So when we talk about what we want to do , they listen .
They 're the ones trying to figure out how they 're going to get ahead and stay ahead .
They 're going to provide for their children . Their children will get good educations , how they will manage so many of the daily challenges of life as they become a contributing member of our society .
I thank each and every one of them for this .
Now , next Monday , the Supreme Court will hear arguments in case
US v . Texas . There is a lot at stake in this Supreme Court decision .
I believe strongly that the president 's action on behalf of DACA and DAPA were rooted in law and precedent , that he was acting in a way consistent with prior judgments and executive actions that they took , both Democrats and Republicans .
And I am certainly very hopeful that we will see a positive outcome from this really important decision that many millions of people living in our country are holding their breaths over , because it will have very significant effects in the lives of so many .
As Steven said , I wanted to list some of the actions that I intend to take on as president , to further the work that is done by immigrant action , by activists , by elected officials , and immigrants themselves .
The first is naturalization . We currently have nine million people in our country who are eligible for naturalization .
They work and pay taxes , but they can't vote , serve on juries , or even join our military in most instances .
Unless they become citizens , they remain at risk of being separated from their own families .
But only seven percent of those eligible naturalize every year .
It is a broken system . It is easier they believe to stay here on a green card .
They 're here legally . They get to work . The hassle of becoming a citizen is sometimes just overwhelming .
We should not have such a series of barriers . I am running this campaign to knock down all the barriers that stand in the way of people getting ahead and staying ahead , and I want to do that when it comes to naturalization .
I will work to expand fee waivers so that those seeking naturalization can get a break on the costs .
I will step up our outward outreach and education , so more people know their options .
No one who can be a citizen and want to be a citizen should miss out on doing that .
So let 's make this a high priority in the next few [ inaudible ] .
I also want to do much more to further our goal of integration .
Because integration is an issue as Melissa , Michelle , and I and Steven were talking earlier .
It 's an issue that cuts across all levels of government , federal , state , and local .
I would create the first ever Office of Immigrant Affairs .
It would build on the work of the Obama administration 's task force , and create a dedicated place in the White House to coordinate immigration policies across the federal government and with state and local government as well .
We also know that integration begins at the local level .
I will provide 15 million dollars in competitive grants to fund efforts like the community navigators , who help guide immigrants through this system and enroll in DACA and DAPA and more .
I visited a session of community navigators in Chicago when I was there for the Illinois primary and I was so impressed .
There were people of all ages who were serving as navigators for immigrants to learn how to be naturalized , to learn what they were eligible for and we want to expand that .
We will also work hard to provide more support and federal resources to help immigrants learn English-language skills .
That will help them thrive even more . We 'll be working with public libraries , community colleges and other platforms , again , taking our lead from local communities where are places that will work ?
I remember visiting the library in Queens in Flushing many years ago .
It was packed with people from all over the world looking for information and it is a perfect platform .
That 's where people feel they can go , they believe it 's a trusted platform .
Well , we need to propagate those and have more opportunities both for information and for acquiring English-language skills .
Now I want to thank Steven for this endorsement , but it was a great privilege to work with Immigrant Action when I was in Senate .
It was a privilege to endorse the DREAM Act every Congress that I served .
It was a privilege to vote for what many said was our best chance at passing comprehensive immigration reform in the past : legislation sponsored by the late Senator Ted Kennedy and John McCain that then Republican President Bush promised to sign .
And I will continue to advocate for comprehensive immigration reform and a path to citizenship , but it 's important that we also stand up against the voices of hate and divisiveness , whether they are in our communities or running for President .
I have said frequently about Donald Trump , Basta , enough prejudice and the bluster and the bigotry and all of the appeals to fear and anxiety and anger .
What is great about our country , which is great in so many ways already , is how we work together , how we pull together , how we welcome new people to our shores , new immigrants to our country , our society , our economy and our political system .
So I 'm excited and I thank you so much for this endorsement and I really look forward to working with you in the years ahead .
Thank you . Thank you all . Thank you . I have to tell you being your senator was just the best experience .
I loved representing our state , working with great members of Congress like Steve Israel .
I want to say how much I admire Steve , what a strong tenacious advocate he has been for the people in his district , in our state and in our country .
And we are going to really miss you . Thank you so much , Steve .
I am happy to be here for any reason , but I love coming to Long Island .
But this is an occasion to tackle a very serious issues that deserves as much attention as we can constantly bring to it .
On average 90 people a day die from gun violence .
That is 33,000 people a year . As Steve said , a very significant majority of both American citizens and gun owners in our country want to see commonsense gun safety measures passed .
What stands in the way ? What stands it the way is the most powerful lobby in Washington .
Now there are other powerful lobbies , don't mistake that .
But if you take all of them from Wall Street to drug companies to big oil , none is as powerful and intimidating as the gun lobby because what they do is just make it clear to anyone who stands up against them in public life at any level from the county and city level to the federal level that they will pay a price , they will be just the object of a tremendous barrage of advertising , of online attacks and everything else that is designed to intimidate and , if necessary , defeat them if they stand up and say ,
Hey , we can have commonsense gun safety measures consistent with the constitution .
We did and we should and will again . So for me , this issue has been a high priority for many years , in part because I have spent too many hours listening to and meeting with families who have lost a loved one to gun violence .
I remember very well as first lady going to Columbine High School in Colorado , and time and time again , more than I care to count , I have looked into the eyes and held the hands of people who ask why , how can we let this happen .
Even though you will hear from some of the most courageous and persistent voices that you could find anywhere in just a few minutes , we need to add our voices to their voices .
We cannot go on like this . If anything else were killing 33,000 people a year , we would be mobilized .
Cars used to kill more people than they do now , and folks said we don't want to take anybody 's car away , but what about seatbelts , what about airbags ?
Let 's figure out what we 're going to do to save lives .
Instead , what the gun lobby has done is to block every possible avenue to doing that .
Steve 's right ; the Brady Bill , which has prevented more than 2 million purchases that were prohibited under it was a very tough legislative battle .
When Senator Sanders was in the House , he voted against the Brady Bill five times .
I was very proud when my husband passed and signed the Brady Bill , and I 'm very grateful that it has saved lives .
And we have a very commonsense agenda . We want comprehensive background checks , and that means close the gun show loophole , close the online loophole , close what 's called the Charleston loophole .
Let me just say why it 's called that . This is another feature that Senator Sanders voted for , and that was to limit the number of days that could be spent trying to conduct a background check .
Now some background checks are quick and easy , but some , you have to try to gather up all the information .
The killer in Charleston , a young man filled with racist hatred , went to buy a gun .
At the end of the three days , the background check was not completed , but the seller had to sell him a gun .
Within 24 hours they found he should have been prohibited from buying that gun .
He took that gun , he went to the church in Charleston , Mother Emanuel Church .
It was a Wednesday , there was a bible study class going on .
He went in , and , in fact , he was welcomed because the faithful people there , they were following their scripture , welcome the stranger .
He was invited in . He sat there , he listened to the bible study , and then he murdered nine people .
So we have to close that loophole . And we also have to reverse the gift that was given to the gun lobby with the passage of a law that grants them special immunity from the general responsibility of showing reasonable care in making and selling products .
That is the rule for every other business that makes every other thing and sells it in our country .
It 's a rule that is rooted in centuries of legal jurisdiction and cases .
The thinking is we do have a duty to the general public not to be negligent , not to be reckless , not to be irresponsible .
I voted against that . Then-Senator Obama voted against it .
Senator Sanders voted for it , and to this day he has defended it repeatedly and persistently .
When challenged on his gun stances , he frequently says ,
Well , I represent Vermont . It 's a small , rural state .
We have no gun laws . Here 's what I want you to know .
Most of the guns that are used in crimes and violence and killings in New York come from out of state .
And the state that has the highest per capita number of those guns that end up committing crimes in New York come from Vermont .
So this is not , oh , no , I live in a rural state , we don't have any of these problems .
This is , you know what , it 's easy to cross borders .
Criminals , domestic abusers , traffickers , people who are dangerously mentally ill , they cross borders , too .
And sometimes they do it to get the guns they use .
This has to become a voting issue for those of us who want to save lives .
And I 'm going to keep working on it and talking out about it .
I know the odds . I know how tough it is .
But I also know that if more people stand up and speak out , as these panelists are doing , then the vast majority of Americans will agree with us , that , yes , there can be constitutionally permissible restraints .
And I want to add [ ] . You now have laws in our country prohibiting the Centers for Disease Control which conducts research on public health problems that cause death or injury for even examining what could be done in order to keep guns out of the wrong hands .
That doesn't suggest to me that this is a very confident position that the gun lobby holds .
Anytime anyone tries to suppress information , to stop research , I have to ask to ask what are they afraid of .
And what they 're afraid of is there are answers that we could work together to implement .
So I am honored to be here with all of you and to hear from each of these panelists who will in her own way and words tell you what it 's been like for them .
I want you to have the opportunity to hear their stories , because I want you to really help me not just in this campaign , but if I 'm so fortunate enough to be president , to really help me make this the kind of voting issue it deserves to be in our country .
Hillary is committed to strengthening Democratic parties and helping them win elections across the board this year and beyond .
Hello Suffolk County . I am so glad to see all of you .
I am thrilled to be here . I love a room filled with Suffolk County Democrats .
I want to thank the Congressman . He and I have had a great working relationship and friendship .
I know I 'm going to miss him , and I know his constituents are going to miss him when he leaves the Congress .
But I hope that he 'll have more opportunities to serve and make sure that the values he fought for , the programs he championed , will continue to have his strong voice .
Steve , thank you so much for I want to thank the county executive .
Steve I saw Steve hello , thank you so much for being here .
Steve was another person I was privileged to work with when I was your Senator .
And I look forward to helping the people of Suffolk County again .
And Duane Gregory , and to all the members of the Suffolk County legislature , thank you for that stirring statement that you made , and the work that you 're doing .
And finally , what can we say about the Suffolk County Democratic Chairman I just wish every county in America had a chairman and an organization like the one that Rich Shaffer leads .
And we 're going to do everything we can , working together , to elect Democrats up and down the ballot in November .
You know , it 's great to be back in Holbrook .
I came to this dinner as a senator , right here in Villa Lombardi 's .
So this is kind of a walk down memory lane for me .
I don't think there were this many people here [ ] I don't think so .
So it 's even better to be here with such a big crowd .
I was thinking yesterday , when I knew I was going to be out here on Long Island , the extraordinary privilege I had of representing you for eight years , working with so many people here in Suffolk County and Nassau County .
I worked hard to protect the Long Island Sound . I figured that was one of the great natural treasures and assets that we have in our country .
I worked hard to protect the Long Island defense jobs , and save the 106 rescue [ ]
And as Steve said , I know so many people out here were affected by 9/11 .
And we had to get to work right away to get the money we needed to try to repair , recover , rebuild the physical structure , but we also had to get the resources to help the families who had been devastated , and to help first responders and the construction [ ] workers and others who had run toward the disaster and stayed there , and worked , and put their own health at risk .
They deserve our support And we finally [ ] and it will always be one of my highest priorities .
There 's a lot we 've worked on together . Funding breast cancer research at Cold Spring Harbor Lab , fighting for more funding for schools and better healthcare services .
The story Steve told you , I remember it like it was yesterday .
I read an article which said that we had young people serving in our military whose families were eligible for stamps .
I read it twice . How can that be ? They 're off fighting .
They 're risking their lives . The families they left behind don't even have enough income to afford food ?
They go to food pantries ? And I called Steve and I said , Steve , this is wrong .
Let 's find out what 's going on . And we did .
Because it matters that we all look out for each other .
The kind of campaign that the other side is running , pitting Americans against one another , is just not who we are .
We 're going to keep reaching out and helping people , and giving folks the opportunity to get ahead and stay ahead .
That 's who we are . So for eight years I had the great privilege of representing you , of fighting for you , of standing up for you , of learning from you .
And now we are in the midst of what will be one of the most consequential presidential elections in a long time .
There is so much at stake in this election . And I know how important it is that New York be heard loudly and clearly .
First in the primary on April 19th , and then in November . We can't do this without you .
And I can tell you , I will never forget you .
You will be part of what I think of and do every single day if I am fortunate enough to be your president .
And I will take any opportunity I get to come to Long Island .
I don't want to make the traffic even worse , but I do want to come back .
That 's something else . We have to work together I was pleased to see that the state had stepped up the LIRR and the LIE , and I want to be a good partner as president to make it possible to actually enjoy living and working .
Anyone running for president should be held to the standard of meeting three tests .
Can you deliver results and improve people 's lives ? Can you keep us safe ?
And can you bring the country together ? I have been running this campaign now for a year .
Not only setting out that test , but doing everything I can to demonstrate that together we can meet it .
So when I think about delivering results , I think about solving problems , working with people at the local level who are living with those problems , listening to people , coming up with goals and strategies .
Now , I know that doesn't sound like a particularly exciting campaign base .
But I can tell you this . If we don't do more of it , if we don't fix our problems and give more people the belief that we are moving forward together , we will not recognize this country that we love .
We have got to rebuild faith in our government , in our political system , and in our economy .
And I intend to do that . There 's nothing more important than good jobs , good jobs with rising incomes .
We need to invest in good jobs , and provide dignity and a bright future .
New jobs in the industries of the future . That 's why I 'm excited about what 's happening out here .
I followed a lot of the activities , even after I left the Senate .
The investments in research , Cold Spring Lab , and Brookhaven , and other places that will create new jobs in the future .
Being an attractive place to do business so that we bring more technology jobs here to Long Island .
That will build more jobs for the future . When I was your Senator , we secured 100 million more dollars in investment for the defense industry , and that spins off new kinds of jobs .
We fought for record funding for the biotech industry . And we 're going to keep pushing that .
So , new jobs , new breakthroughs , more innovation .
And we 're also going to look hard at how we do more infrastructure .
When we talk about the rail , when we talk about the expressway , we need to be investing in more infrastructure to repair and build the roads and bridges .
There are a lot of great jobs . Good union jobs .
And I will use the White House bully pulpit to stand up for the basic proposition that the American labor movement helped to create the American middle class .
Another way we 're going to bring new jobs is , once again , to make it in America with advanced manufacturing .
We can do this . There are high-value manufacturing jobs that can be attracted here .
In research , in defense , in the kind of advanced computing and 3-D design that needs to be using skilled labor .
And we 're going to combat climate change by investing in clean renewable energy .
Now we also need to do more to help small businesses , which create two thirds of all jobs .
And I particularly want to find ways to encourage young people to start small businesses .
And minority owned and women-owned And I did very much applaud the governor 's efforts to raise the minimum wage along with the legislature , so that we can lift people out of poverty .
And then tomorrow is equal pay day . We 've got to make sure women get equal pay for the work we do .
[ ] this is also a family issue . If you 've got a mother , a wife , a sister , a daughter who is working , it 's in everybody 's interest that she 's paid equally .
There is no women 's discount when you check out at the supermarket .
You know , so the cashier says , well , you 're a white woman , you only have to pay 78 cents on the dollar , or you 're an African-American woman , you only have to pay 68 cents , you 're a Latina woman , you only have to pay 58 cents .
I 've been shopping for a long time . That has never been offered to me .
When I think about jobs and the economy , I also think about how we have to protect the vibrancy of Long Island 's neighborhoods .
You have some of the most beautiful places to live in America .
And it 's important that we have a suburban policy .
When I was your Senator , we actually put on a suburban conference .
What were the best ideas to deal with rising property taxes , congested transportation , overcrowded schools what could we do to make sure that what attracted and kept people in Long Island would be there for their children and grandchildren .
And that to me is still a big issue . We don't pay enough attention to what smart growth looks like .
And I 'm going to make sure we do when I am your president .
I also want to work to ensure that every child has a good teacher in a good school no matter what ZIP code that child lives in .
And I would like to see us have early childhood education and universal prepaid healthcare really everybody [ ] to succeed in school .
And then we 're going to make college affordable again for middle class families , working-class families .
I have a plan for debt-free tuition . My opponent has a plan , he says , for free tuition .
Except my late father said , when anybody tells you something is free , ask to see the fine print .
It turns out that the only way his plan can work is if states contribute a third of the cost .
I don't know . There are a lot of Republican governors and legislatures out there .
It seems unlikely that 's going to happen . So rather than making a promise you can't keep , let 's have a plan that you can actually implement , which is what I will do .
And then we 're going to help everybody pay down your student debt .
You know you can refinance a mortgage or car payment .
You ought to be able to refinance your student debt .
And we 're going to make it possible . And then once we get the interest rates down , which has been outrageously high for student debt , we 're going to help people transfer into programs where you only have to pay your loan back as a percent of your income .
That 's what I got to do when I got out of law school .
So that I could afford it . I went to work for the Children 's Defense Fund .
I got paid , like , $ 14,000 a year .
I never could have taken that job unless I had a way to pay it back that I could afford .
And then we 're going to put a date certain to end your payments .
After 20 years , you should not have to be paying for your student loans .
And I don't think the federal government should be making money off of sending young people to college .
That 's an investment for them . [ ] the Affordable Care Act ,
and we 're going to go right after prescription drug costs .
They are skyrocketing [ ] . Now , one thing I want you to pay close attention to is the Republicans want to repeal every right we 've gotten over the past decades .
So I want you to know where I stand . I will defend a woman 's right to make her own health care decisions .
I will defend Planned Parenthood against all of these partisan attacks .
I will defend marriage equality and end discrimination against the LGBT community .
I will defend workers ' rights and union rights . I will defend voting rights and work to end Citizens United , which has corrupted the American I will continue to work for comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship .
I will defend Social Security and Medicare against the Republicans ' plans to privatize them .
I will work to improve the rights of people with disabilities , because we need to help them become more self-sufficient .
And I will continue to take on the gun lobby to try to get comprehensive [ ]
Earlier today , Steve and I were in Port Washington , holding a panel discussion about gun violence with five women who lost children , a nephew , a mother .
Because I want people to understand , these are not just statistics .
These are families like yours and mine . The principal of the Sandy Hook Elementary School , her daughter was with us .
The mother of one of the young women murdered in the movie theater in Aurora , Colorado was with us .
The aunt of the mother of two young men , one just 14 years old , senselessly killed on a street in Brooklyn .
You hear these stories and you think , it can't happen .
One mother from here on Long Island told about her daughter being murdered by the boyfriend of one of her roommates , because her daughter had told her roommate that she should break up with him .
Everyday life stories , walking down the street , going to a movie theater , talking to your roommate about her boyfriend , and next thing you know , they 're taken from you .
This is one of the biggest differences in this primary .
My opponent voted against the Brady Bill five times . He voted for the law that tells gun manufacturers and sellers they have special immunity from the general responsibility to show care in what you make and what you sell , and how you advertise them .
And I think it 's imperative that we have to stand up against the gun lobby and put forth a commonsense agenda that is supported by the vast majority of Americans , including gun owners .
And that 's exactly what I 'm going to do .
Carolyn McCarthy bravely started this work . And I want to make sure we continue it , and that people understand this is not just about somebody else , just a statistic on the news .
We have to protect our country . The person that you vote for to be president will also be commander-in-chief .
A lot of what you 're hearing from Trump and Cruz is not only offensive , it 's dangerous .
And it 's being heard all over the world . I 'm getting messages from leaders and concerned active international observers about what 's going on .
And it 's now clear that a lot of what Trump has said about Muslims is being used to recruit terrorists .
It 's on their websites , their blogs . It 's communicated .
This man is running for president . Hear what he says .
Don't let any Muslims ever come to America again . This is dangerous .
And Ted Cruz , he 's advocating that we have special police patrols patrolling neighborhoods where American Muslims live .
I have no idea what he thinks that would be .
He doesn't either . As Bill Bratton said , he doesn't know what the hell he 's talking about .
And that about sums it up . And then you have Republicans calling for walls and mass arrests , and deportations , and surveillance .
We have Trump playing coy with the KKK . When you have this kind of atmosphere being created , we have to be very firm and strong in rejecting it .
Because it does make us less secure . We have to form a coalition to defeat ISIS , which is what I intend to do , and I need Muslim majority nations to join in that coalition .
And that 's exactly how we 're going to [ ]
And then the final test is , can we bring our country together ?
When I was your Senator , I worked with everybody .
Actually , probably sponsored legislation with practically every Republican I 've worked with .
Joined forces with some of them on major legislation . I 'll go anywhere anytime to meet with anyone to find common ground to solve our problems .
That 's what I think I 'm called to do .
If I am your president , that 's exactly what I will do .
And those people who are nervous , worried , fearful , even angry about their lives , about what 's happening in our country I will do my very best to reach out to them to create an atmosphere , an opportunity for them to feel that they , too , count , and they too will have [ ] part of our American family .
I really believe that New York values are not just good for New York , they 're good for America .
So I 'm asking all of you to please help me on April 19th .
Talk to your friends , your neighbors , your colleagues at work .
Get everybody out to vote on April 19th . A week from tomorrow .
Let 's have a big , confident New York election .
And let 's keep working to clinch the White House .
Thank you all so much . In her remarks , Hillary emphasized that the gender pay gap is not just a women 's issue , but a family issue and an economic issue and that pay equity will help families get ahead and stay ahead .
Thank you very much Robert . I am absolutely thrilled to be here on this occasion .
I want to thank Robert and everyone at Glassdoor for hosting us today and lifting up this issue .
It is Equal Pay Day . It is also the one-year anniversary of my journey in my campaign so I am very happy to be with you .
Now we 're here to talk about this pay gap that costs women and their families and our economy so much money every single year .
And I emphasize the three aspects of this , because what I have found as I have gone around the country , now for many years , but particularly for this past year is that it 's important to make the point that the failure to ensure equal pay for women also impacts families and the broader economy .
So Glassdoor is focusing on an issue that has really almost universal repercussions .
Of course it devalues the work women do from minimum-wage workers to chief executive and even the best athletes in the world .
And Megan , who you will hear from in a minute , is the midfielder for the U.S. women 's national soccer team .
And we cheered when they won the World Cup and we cheered when they won the Olympic gold medal .
And we noticed that our men 's team hasn't yet done that .
Yet somehow , the men are making hundreds of thousands of dollars more than the women .
Now you know the phrase equal pay for equal work ?
Well in America , we believe in equal pay for equal play , too .
And that 's why we need to elevate this issue , but I will quickly add we know not everyone 's convinced .
There 's still a lot of misinformation out there . So I 'd like to take just a few minutes to quickly debunk some of the myths about the pay gap .
Myth number one : Some say there isn't really a gender pay gap .
Well , that is just wrong . The typical woman working full time in 2014 was paid 79 percent of what men were paid .
But when you break it down : for African American women , that number is 60 percent ; for Latinas , it 's 55 percent .
And the last time I checked , there 's no discount for being a woman .
Groceries don't cost us less . Rent doesn't cost us less .
So why should we be paid less ? Now myth number two : Some say this is a problem just for women , that men don't have to worry about it .
But that 's wrong again . If you 're a man married to a woman , if you 're the man who 's the son of a working woman , if you 're the father to a young working woman this is your problem too .
And plenty of men care about this issue , because they they believe in fairness and they know this just isn't right .
Now myth number three : Some say , isn't gender pay discrimination already illegal ?
Why are we still talking about this ? Because it still happens everyday .
And I have been talking to many tens of thousands of people for the last year .
It is one of the most commonly raised questions in all of the events that I do .
I met a young man I met in New Hampshire who got a job working a cashier .
He got the job in part because his mother was already a cashier at the same store , so when the vacancy came up , she talked to the manager , they interviewed her son and he was hired .
And he was , along with his mother , very excited .
And then he brought home his first paycheck . They opened it together , ready to celebrate .
He was only 17 years old . And they discovered that , after one week on the job , he was making a dollar an hour more than his mother who had worked there for four years .
I was also asked by a young girl in Las Vegas ,
If you 're elected the girl president , will you be paid the same as the boy president ?
I said , Well , I think so .
That 's why organizations like Glassdoor are important , because you promote transparency .
That is really at the root at what we 're going to be having to advocate for and secure .
That 's why we also need legislation like the Paycheck Fairness Act , so people won't be fired or retaliated against for asking what their co-workers make .
If you 're scared of people having more information , that may raise a question you should ask yourself , maybe you 're not being fair .
Now , we know there are a lot of other reasons why women end up earning less than men over the course of their lifetimes .
And we 've got to take all of those on .
I 'm very proud that New York and California have raised the minimum wage .
I 'm very proud that New York and California have raised the minimum wage because nearly two-thirds of minimum wage workers are women .
Two-thirds of workers in tipped jobs are women and those jobs are hard , they 're often insecure , and they don't pay nearly enough .
I hope the rest of the country will catch up with New York and California .
Women all over America deserve a raise . We also have to encourage more women to enter higher-paying fields , like science , technology , engineering and mathematics .
Now these were not that open to women and in some cases just downright unwelcoming .
Now more and more women are venturing in , contributing everyday as innovators , inventors , coders , builders and discoverers .
And these are good jobs and good jobs mean better pay .
We also have to do more to support working parents , moms and dads alike , so they can stay on the job and keep more of their paycheck .
We should be supporting paid family leave in our country .
And again I 'm very proud of California and now New York and other states that are making significant strides in that .
It also shouldn't cost as much for parents to afford quality childcare , so that they can focus on work when they 're at work .
And so I think we have to look at this issue of equal pay in the context of everything else we need to do to support people , particularly women who are in the workplace .
Now perhaps the biggest myth of all is that we can't solve these problems .
Well I absolutely reject that , we can if we summon the political will .
These are going to be some of the biggest issues that 'll come to the forefront of our political and economic lives .
Other countries have made it easier for women to be mothers and have careers , to be caretakers especially of their parents and have careers .
Not out of altruism , but because they know that it 's foolish to let half the population 's talent and energy go unused .
If we want to compete and win in the global economy , which I certainly hope we will , we need to make it possible for everyone to contribute .
So this Equal Pay Day , let 's commit to doing our part to make America a more equitable place .
Our parents and our teachers ; let 's encourage our girls .
Our bosses ; let 's treat women fairly , let 's go the distance to support employees with family responsibilities .
For Congress ; let 's pass the Paycheck Fairness Act and support paid family leave .
Now occasionally when I give a speech like this , which I do practically everyday , people will say ,
Oh there she goes , she 's playing the gender card .
And what I say to that is if talking about equal pay and paid leave and more opportunities for women and girls is playing the gender card then deal me in .
Because these are absolutely incredibly important questions of countless women in our country in their families lives and the future of our economy .
So I 'm looking forward to the discussion with these amazing panelists and I thank you all for being here to join with us in lifting up the importance of the Equal Pay Day .
Thank you . At an organizing event at Industry City in Brooklyn , Hillary Clinton discussed her plans to raise incomes and break down barriers for all communities , protect the rights of women , LGBT Americans and DREAMers and tackle America 's epidemic of gun violence .
Whoa ! Hello , Sunset Park ! Hello , Brooklyn !
Oh , I am so happy to be here with all of you , and I want to start by thanking my friend and the congresswoman who represents this district my friend , Nydia , who is who is one of the hardest working , most effective members of Congress who does not give up .
Her tenacity , her resilience makes her the best possible representative of all of you in the 7th Congressional District .
I also want to thank Assemblyman Felix Ortiz , who is here .
We 're in his district . And Maritza Davila , we are also nearby her district ; she 's also an assemblywoman .
I want to thank Roseli Rosario for introducing us today .
I want to thank Toby Love , who did a great job with his performance .
And I am proud to acknowledge and thank Dan-el Padilla Peralta , who is a DREAMer , who I first encountered when he was a student and had performed so spectacularly at Princeton that he had won a scholarship to study in England , and he didn't know what to do because he 's undocumented .
So he I read about him . I read about his dilemma and I reached out to him and I said , I have always supported DREAMers .
I supported the very first DREAM Act in the Congress when I was in the Senate .
And we need people like him to have a chance to succeed in America .
So I went to work . I was able to get him a visa to go and study with the promise that he would return .
He did return . He is continuing his studies . He is representative of the extraordinary DREAMer population in America and we are the better off if we embrace them and support them , which is exactly what I will do .
Now , I would love to have somebody take that music stand away .
Okay . Because if I get going I don't want to , like , run into it or something .
First of all , it is so great to be back in New York .
And to get to travel across this great city and every other part of the state .
Because you see , I not only love New York and am incredibly grateful every day that I had the honor of being your senator .
But I actually think New York values are really good for America .
And so I want to have this chance just to tell you a few things about what I want to do if I am fortunate enough to be your president .
And I want you to imagine with me the kind of progress we can make together .
Because that 's what we have to do to create the kind of future that we want for ourselves , our families , our communities , and certainly for the next generation .
Lots of times when people talk about running for office , they tell you what they 're against , they tell you what they 're going to stop , they tell you all of the negative side of politics .
And that 's okay ; there 's a role for that .
But I am interested in telling you what we 're going to build together and how we 're going to bring people together .
So imagine a tomorrow where we do have enough good jobs for everybody with rising incomes that will support a family , give people the chance to get ahead and stay ahead .
Imagine that we are investing in our infrastructure , both physical and virtual , and we are putting people to work to actually make us more competitive in the future .
Imagine that we have the chance to bring manufacturing back to America advanced manufacturing .
I have seen that . I have seen the future .
I was in Buffalo yesterday , and as Senator I worked to create this amazing medical campus the Buffalo Niagara Medical Campus .
I saw astonishing advances that are being carried out there .
I saw aeronautical engineers working with biomedical engineers . I heard about the production of the kind of devices that are being made there .
I 've also seen what happens when people understand 3D design and computing .
I know what we can do if we understand we can take back a lot of the lead in manufacturing .
I 'm going to change the tax incentives to support people who want to bring jobs to America and not away from America .
And we 're also going to be investing in research again .
The United States has always been the leader in research , and unfortunately this Congress , as Nydia knows so well , has cut the budget and we are losing ground .
Well , we 're going to go back to being number one in the world by a wide margin .
And yes , we are going to join together to combat climate change and transition to clean , renewable energy .
I feel so strongly about this . I am absolutely committed .
I worked as your Senator to try to raise the visibility .
I worked with Republicans , and then I watched as the Republicans were all intimidated they can't even say the words climate change anymore .
And you listen to the ones running for president , and when they 're asked what do you think about climate change , they all say the same thing :
Well , I don't know , I 'm not a scientist .
And I keep saying publicly every chance I get , well , go talk to a scientist and actually listen .
But President Obama and I started in 2009 in bringing the world together to eventually accomplish the Paris agreement that sets a framework for bringing down greenhouse gas emissions , injects some urgency and collaboration into it .
And I want the United States to take the lead because some nation is going to be the 21st century clean-energy superpower .
Right now , I think it 's between China , Germany and us .
Let 's make it us and let 's lead the world .
And I 've set some big goals . Let 's deploy a half a billion more solar panels by the end of my first term , and enough clean energy to power every home in America by the end of my second term .
There are millions of jobs and businesses that we would create .
Nydia has been the ranking member and the chair which is a big deal on the Small Business Committee in the House of Representatives .
And she knows how important it is to stimulate small business because that 's still where most of our jobs will come from .
And I particularly want to clear all the barriers that stand in the way of young people starting your own business , being entrepreneurs .
And I will also knock down the barriers for minority-owned and women-owned small businesses .
While we are growing the economy , creating more jobs , we will also make it fairer .
Among the things we will do is to raise the national minimum wage .
I am very proud of New York , and I was with Governor Cuomo when he signed the bill raising the minimum wage in New York .
We 've now got to do that for the entire nation .
And the other the other way we will raise incomes quickly is to guarantee equal pay for women 's work .
Now , and here 's what I want you to know .
This is obviously a women 's issue , but it 's not only a women 's issue .
This is a family issue . If you have a mother , a wife , a daughter , a sister who is working and they are not being paid equally , that affects everybody in the family , and it also affects the economy .
And the last time I checked , I don't think women going up to the cashier at the supermarket are told , oh , okay , you 're a white woman , you only have to pay 78 cents on the dollar .
You 're an African American woman , you only have to pay 68 cents on the dollar .
Or you 're a Latino woman , you only have to pay 58 cents on the dollar because that 's the difference .
There is no gender discount , right ? So when we finally require and enforce equal pay , it lifts everybody up .
And what I 'm interested in is seeing incomes rise .
Many Americans haven't had a raise in 15 years . Now , part of the problem with that is we had this interruption between two Democratic Presidents .
It is a fact , if any of you have any friends who are potentially in any way tempted by the Republicans looking at you , I don't think you do , but if you were to run across such a person , you can tell them that it 's a fact a fact our economy does better when we have a Democrat in the White House .
We saw that in the 90s with 23 million new jobs and incomes going up for everybody .
And then we had a Republican back in the White House , and slash taxes on the wealthy , increase inequality , take their eyes off of the mortgage markets and the financial markets , and
we know what happened , right ? The worst financial crisis since the Great Depression .
Now , President-elect Obama called me a few days after the 2008 election .
He asked me to come see him in Chicago , and I didn't know why .
I got there ; it turned out he wanted me to be Secretary of State .
But before we got to that before we even got there , he just looked at me and he said , It is so much worse than they told us .
Because after the election , they have to give you more of the information that they try to keep from you while they 're running against you .
But he was absolutely right . We were losing 800,000 jobs a month .
Nine million Americans lost their jobs . Five million family homes were lost .
$13 trillion in family wealth was wiped out . Now , I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for digging us out of the hole that the Republicans put us into .
So we cannot go back to the snake-oil policies of trickle-down economics .
We can't let that happen . But this general election will be fought out in large measure on economic grounds .
The Republicans will , as they often do , basically say , boy , they 're going to get the economy going .
But look at the facts . Look at the history .
And tell your friends not to buy it . Because what I will do is to build on the progress we 've made but take it further more jobs , rising incomes , more opportunities .
And we will of course go after the bad actors .
That 's why I 've put out the most comprehensive plan about stopping the bad actors from wrecking our economy again .
Everybody from Paul Krugman to professors across the country have said I 'm the only one who has a realistic plan to rein in the shadow banking industry .
Now , we 're also going to work to improve education at all levels , starting with preschool education .
Because a lot of kids don't get prepared to succeed , and they deserve it .
Nobody should be left out . And we 've got to do more to make sure that non-English-speaking children are given the support that they need .
And then I 'm going to work with teachers to improve elementary and secondary education because I am really tired of people scapegoating and criticizing teachers when we are not providing the resources to help them do their jobs in the first place .
And I have a plan to make it affordable for every middle-class , working and poor family to be able to afford to send a child to college .
It 's a plan for debt-free tuition . It 's a compact .
The federal government does its part , state government does its part , but we guarantee you will not have to borrow money to pay tuition .
Because right now , we are not only making it more difficult for a lot of young people to go and finish , but they end up , as you know very well , with too much debt .
How many of you have student debt ? Right . Well , you 're in good company .
I got to tell you , 40 million Americans have student debt , and a total of about $1.2 trillion .
So here 's what I 'm going to do . I 'm going to give you the opportunity to refinance your debt , drop those big interest rates .
And then you 're going to be able to move into a program where you pay it back as a percentage of your income , which is what I got to do when I got out of law school .
And we are not going to let the government keep making money off of lending money for kids to go to college .
This will not only lift a big burden off of so many young people and families , it will free up their resources for other kinds of investments and expenses .
You 'll be able to move out of your parents ' basement , for example .
Although I 'm sure they 'll be sorry to see you go .
I also want to say a quick word about healthcare .
I will defend the Affordable Care Act . We 're going to get the cost down , we 're going to get more choices .
But we have now extended health care coverage to 20 million Americans , and before there was something called Obamacare , there was something called Hillarycare .
So forgive me if I get a little amused when people on the political front say , well , they 're going to take on vested interests , they 're going to stand up to special interests .
I 'm sitting there thinking , I 've done it .
I have been on the front lines for years . And I was very committed , but when we lost which we did I turned around , and as Nydia said , worked with Republicans and Democrats to create the Children 's Health Insurance Program , which insures 8 million kids .
That 's why I was so thrilled when the President passed and signed the Affordable Care Act , because here 's where we are .
We are at 90 percent of full or universal coverage .
We have never been so close in our entire history .
Now , the Republicans want to repeal it and of course , they never tell you what they would substitute for it because they don't want you to know , but here basically is what it would be .
If you have a pre-existing condition , you 're out of luck again .
If you 're a woman , you will pay more than men .
If you 're a young person who has been able to stay on your parents ' policy until the age of 26 , that 'll be gone .
Because that 's part of the Affordable Care Act . So we 've got a lot at stake .
We 've got to make it work better , but we can't start over .
My opponent , Senator Sanders , shares the goal I do of universal coverage , but we 're at 90 percent .
I think it 's easier to get from 90 to 100 than from 0 to 100 .
So I 'm going to stay on the path of the Affordable Care Act .
The other thing that I want you to pay close attention to is what the Republicans are saying about your rights .
About all Americans ' rights . Because , make no mistake about it , they want to turn the clock back .
They don't want to just turn it back a year or two .
They 'd love to turn it back a century . Right ?
So I want you to know where I stand , and these are issues that have been important to me for decades .
I will defend a woman 's right to make her own health care decisions .
And I will , as I always have , defend Planned Parenthood from these partisan attacks .
I have been on the front lines of this fight a long time , which is why Planned Parenthood action fund and NARAL endorsed me , because I know and make no mistake about it , all this talk of you 're hearing from Republicans , all of the legislative actions by governors and legislatures in a lot of our states are really meant to end that right to end and the constitutional right under Roe v . Wade .
And this is not an afterthought . This is not a distraction .
I 've traveled all over the world , and I know what happens when women are unable to make their own choices , and government substitutes its opinion for the woman , her doctor , her faith , and her family .
We are not going back , my friends . And I 'll tell you this .
I will defend marriage equality . I will work to end discrimination against the LGBT community .
It is now even more important to pass the Federal Equality Act when we see what states are doing .
But listen to the Republicans . Some people have the mistaken idea that folks say one thing in the election , and then they change .
Don't buy that . When you hear them talk about our rights , take them seriously .
I will also defend voting rights . And I will work to reverse and eliminate Citizens United .
And let me tell you how committed I am to achieve comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship .
Nydia mentioned some of the things I want to tell you , my first my very first experience with Latinos , with Hispanics , in that case I was about 11 years old .
And it 's hard to believe , but in those days I grew up in Chicago it was surrounded by farm fields .
O'Hare airport wasn't there . It was farming . And so migrants would come up from Mexico , they 'd start picking the crops and follow the weather , until they got to Chicago , and then they 'd end up in Michigan , because as they moved north , more harvests were occurring .
So my church asked if any of us girls wanted to babysit the little children of the migrant farm workers while their parents and their older brothers and sisters went into the fields on Saturday .
And I signed up , as did one of my really good friends .
So my mother drove us down this very long dirt road to these shacks where migrant laborers were living .
And so we took care of the little kids all day , and then at the end of the day , about 5 o'clock , an old rickety bus appeared at the end of this dirt road , bringing the adults and the older kids back from the fields .
And when those little children saw the bus , they knew that their families were back .
And they started running down the road . And , you know , we 're chasing them thinking , my gosh , we 're going to be in trouble .
And , of course , we couldn't catch them . But as the door of the bus opened and parents began coming off , these little kids were throwing themselves into their parents ' arms .
And I just did there and thought , oh my gosh , that 's what I used to do when I was a little kid .
When my father came home from work , I would run and hold out my arms , and I thought , these are people just like me .
These are people who have the same values . They care about their families and their children .
And they work so hard . Now , that was many years ago , but my feelings about this have only gotten deeper .
I did go to South Texas to register Hispanic voters .
I have been a staunch supporter of making conditions better for farmworkers .
I 'm proud to have the United Farmworkers endorsement , because I 've worked hard for many years .
But here 's what we must do . We must have a path to citizenship , and we must work on that and I have promised to do it as soon as I 'm president , to see whether we can't make progress within the first hundred days of getting a bill up to the Congress .
But I believe our best chance in the past was in 2007 , when Ted Kennedy and John McCain shepherded a bill that George W . Bush said he would sign .
And unfortunately , my opponent and others opposed it . So now we 're nine years later it will be 10 years later in 2017 .
And it 's in America 's interest in the interest of our values and of our economy to really focus on this .
I will support President Obama 's actions on DACA and DAPA , that have given a level of protection to DREAMers and their families .
And I look forward to debating whoever emerges as the Republican nominee about this .
Because both of them have really put anti-immigration statements at the core of their campaigns .
Donald Trump started his campaign calling immigrants rapists and criminals .
And he 's gone on from there . So this is an issue that I am committed to .
There are a lot of people in Brooklyn who are working hard every single day , raising their families .
And across New York and in the harbor is the Statue of Liberty , reminding us of who we are and where we came from .
We are a nation of immigrants . And I am proud of it .
Thank you . There is another issue I feel also passionate about .
And that is giving support to our friends our fellow American citizens in Puerto Rico , to be able to be able to have the same rights as any state or city in America does .
To be able to declare bankruptcy and get out from under a lot of these onerous debts .
And what I found as I have talked about this and
Nydia 's been a great leader and advisor to me is that a lot of Americans don't even know Puerto Ricans are citizens .
I went down to Puerto Rico in September to speak out about this .
Because I think the Congress should move quickly to pass the right kind of legislation to provide to provide relief consistent with the self-determination of the Puerto Rican people .
And one of the great one of the great injustices is , they are American citizens , but if they live in Puerto Rico , they can't vote for president .
If they move to New York , they can vote for president .
Makes no sense at all . So when I was a senator from New York , I considered myself a senator also representing Puerto Rico , and I will keep fighting for Puerto Rico .
And finally , I will also keep fighting against the gun lobby .
This is also really personal to me . I have been with too many family members who are grieving over a loved one who has been murdered .
We lose , on average , 90 people a day to gun violence in America .
Homicides , suicides , and terrible , tragic , avoidable accidents .
That is 33,000 people a year . The scope of the problem is just mind-bending , when you think about all those lives cut short .
And I have the greatest respect for those family members who are speaking out , who are taking on the NRA and the gun lobby , who are standing up to elected officials who do the bidding of the gun lobby in Congress or in a state .
And I think what I 'm advocating makes common sense .
Comprehensive background checks , close the gun show loophole , the online loophole , close what 's called the Charleston loophole .
I 'll tell you what that is . At the end of three days , regardless of whether the background check is completed or not , you get to buy the gun .
The young man filled with hate and racism in South Carolina went to buy a gun .
At the end of three days , the background check wasn't complete , because when it was completed , about 24 hours later , they found out he wasn't entitled to buy a gun because of a previous record .
But anyway , he went and got that gun . And then he went to that venerable church Mother Emmanuel in Charleston and he walked in during a Bible study on a Wednesday night , and the church members and the pastor invited him in .
They asked him to come and sit with them while they did their Bible study , welcoming the stranger , which is part of our faith tradition .
At the end of the Bible study , he pulled out that gun and murdered nine people .
Now , I 'm not saying that what I 'm proposing would end all killings .
But this I do know . Ever since we 've had the Brady bill , more than 2 million purchases have been prohibited because people had records , they were fugitives , stalkers , domestic abusers , they 'd been committed and we stopped those people from getting guns .
So our job is to bring this forward . And what we also have to do is to end the immunity from liability that the Congress gave to gun manufacturers and sellers .
And this is a big difference between Senator Sanders and myself , because he voted against the Brady bill five times .
He voted to make it difficult to shut down gun dealers who are responsible for a lot of the crime guns .
And he voted to give immunity to gun makers and sellers .
So I want to do everything I can to build a great coalition so that people will stand with us and not be intimidated .
They 're already coming after me . I don't mind at all .
But we 're going to need to do this together .
And I 'm going to absolutely support all the steps that President Obama has been taking to try to deal with this on an executive level , but then we 're going to really go after legislation , because here 's the last thing I want you to know about this .
90 percent of Americans support the plan I 've outlined , and 80 percent of gun owners support it .
So we need to separate the vast majority of responsible gun owners who don't want killers to get access to guns , who want to do more to protect people from these accidents , who want to help prevent suicides when it might be just an impulsive that people could get over if they waited and didn't have access to a gun .
So we 're going to do everything we can to save lives .
And then , finally , let me just say I want you to imagine that we work together to keep our country safe , because that 's one of the big tests that you face your president , because you 're also commander-in-chief , and we here in New York know how critical that is .
And I will do everything I can to keep us safe at home , and to create a coalition to defeat ISIS , and protect our friends , our allies , and our partners .
Now , finally , I think we 've got to figure out how we 're going to unite our country .
Right now , there is just so much divisiveness , so much mean-spiritedness .
We are great already . We just have to work together to go even greater .
I will go anywhere , anytime to meet with anyone to find common ground .
I did that when I was first lady , when I was senator , when I was secretary of state .
And I know how important that is . Because we worked to recover after 9/11 .
I had to get Republican support to be able to do that , including from President Bush .
And we got it . I 'm going to do everything I can .
That 's why I will work with anybody , because that 's how you get things done in Washington .
So let me ask you this . Because I can't do any of this without your help .
I 'm thrilled you 're here to be with me today .
But I need you to be part of this campaign for the next 10 days .
We 've got to get everybody out to vote on April 19th .
Please go to my website , HillaryClinton.com, to find out how you can be involved anywhere in the city , or wherever else you 're from .
You can text JOIN , J-O-I-N , 47246 , to be part of it .
But there will be people around to sign up and help .
Because this primary is so critical . We have to send a strong message .
Right now I 'm about well , let 's see , I 'm about 2.5 million votes ahead of Senator Sanders .
And last time I checked , about 220 or so pledged delegates ahead .
So we are on the path to the nomination . But I need to win being here in New York , because the sooner I can become the nominee , I can turn and unify the Democratic Party like I did with President Obama in 2008 .
And the sooner we can go after the Republicans full-time .
So , my friends , let 's go and have a great primary victory in New York on April 19th .
Thank you all so much . Thank you . Thank you so much .
Wow . I am so excited to be back in Athens .
And it is great to be here at the end of a road trip through one of the most beautiful parts of our country .
I thank Sherrod for his friendship , his leadership , his absolutely tenacious voice in the Senate on your behalf and on behalf of the values that made America great and will make us greater .
So thank your superb senator . I really appreciate you being here , Sherrod .
I also want to recognize and thank Mayor Steve Patterson from here in Athens as well .
All the other state , county and city elected officials .
And of course , I have to thank Art . Art Oestrike , who invited us to come here , disrupting his entire brewing schedule .
But did it with good cheer , having us here in Jackie O 's .
And I have made another campaign promise . I know I should stop making campaign promises , but I only make promises that I intend to keep , not promises I cannot make .
And I have told Art that if I 'm so fortunate enough to be back in the White House , some Jackie O 's will be there too .
Now , I will let him choose ; it might be Razz Wheat , it might be something else , but I will let him choose what we will serve .
Okay ? So that 's one promise I really look forward to keeping .
Over the past two days , I 've had some extraordinary conversations tough and honest .
I 've met with coal families who want to be thanked , as they should be , for the work that they and their parents and their grandparents did to build our country .
I 've met with steelworker families who don't understand how China gets away with undercutting our jobs and businesses .
And I 've met with railroaders who have watched as the decline of coal and steel in this region has led to cuts in rail service , which cost jobs now and will cut the region off from more jobs later .
So to everyone who took the time to tell me about their lives , both the good and the bad , I am really grateful and thank you .
I will not forget that generosity . Thanks to you , I 've learned a lot which is what I came here to do .
We started in Ashland , Kentucky , where I met with dozens of steelworkers who were laid off when the factory where they worked for decades was idled .
Then we drove to Williamson , West Virginia , a town deep in the coalfields , where the community is working hard to build a more diverse economy after losing hundreds of jobs .
Today , we had a conversation in Charleston , West Virginia , that was both sorrowful and inspiring , with people in recovery for addiction and the doctors , the counselors , the police officers , recovering addicts and others who are helping them get back on their feet .
I 'm ending my trip here , in Athens , because small businesses like Jackie O 's are what make this such a dynamic , entrepreneurial community and we need more of that .
It shouldn't have to be said , but I will say it : Appalachia is a vital part of the United States and all of you here today and people across this region are vital to America 's future .
And I know that too often , people feel like they 're not treated that way .
But you should be . Appalachia is home to some of the most resilient , hardworking people anywhere on this planet .
And you deserve every chance to get ahead and stay ahead in America .
Our country succeeds only when working people everywhere can succeed not just in big cities , but in the hills of eastern Kentucky , right here in southern Ohio , deep in the coalfields of West Virginia , the small towns that dot this part of America .
We need to break down all the barriers holding people back , not just here in Appalachia but across America , so everyone can share in the promise of our country .
Families here , like families everywhere , want the same things : good jobs that pay enough to provide a middle-class life .
Good schools for kids and opportunities when they graduate . Safe and welcoming communities to grow up in and grow old in .
And something less tangible , but just as essential : faith in the future , and confidence that your kids and grandkids will have all the choices and opportunities they deserve .
That shouldn't be too much to ask especially for a place that has done so much for America .
For generations , Appalachian coal put the lights on in people 's homes and schools , kept assembly lines rolling in factories .
Steel plants helped build our skyscrapers and win World War II . Appalachian chemical plants made the products that have shaped modern life .
These were tough jobs , but they provided a ticket to the middle class , but it wasn't an easy ride .
More than a hundred thousand let me repeat that : more than a hundred thousand miners died on the job in the 20th century in America .
More than twice that many succumbed to black lung disease .
The United Mine Workers put their lives on the line in places like Harlan County and Blair Mountain to secure the right to organize , bargain collectively and protect the wellbeing of miners on the job and in retirement .
Their hard-won victories helped strengthen the labor movement nationwide , and countless workers not just those in unions , but countless workers have benefited in all kinds of industries .
So there 's no question that the workers of Appalachia made America more prosperous and more secure .
And that legacy should be honored not only as a rich chapter in our history , but as a debt we always must strive to repay .
Now , I know that for a lot of people in this region , these words may sound nice , but it 's not so easy to believe them .
You 've had a lot of politicians make a lot of promises to you over the years that they couldn't keep .
I 'm not going to do that . What I can promise you is this : If I have the honor of serving as your president , I will fight for you and your families every day whether you vote for me or not .
I will be your partner . I will be your partner and I will not for one minute give up on Appalachia not on your workers , your children , your retirees or your communities .
Now , some of you may be wondering how I can say all this .
Because here in Ohio a few weeks ago during the Ohio primary , it sounded like I said something differently about coalminer jobs .
To put it plainly , I misspoke . It 's one reason why I took this trip , to say that directly to the people who are affected , to make sure you know where I stand because I would never disrespect the people here .
And I know that some may well say I 'm talking about coal country , I 'm talking about steelworkers , I 'm talking about the region because of the election .
But let 's be honest : In the broader region , this isn't one where a lot of Democrats running for president tend to win a lot of votes these days .
And I know that there are people in this region I met with some of them yesterday who find it hard thinking about voting for any Democrat or voting for me particularly .
But I am going to keep trying to convince people otherwise , but that 's not what this trip is about .
I 'm here because I do want to be your president .
Because I believe that our best years can still be ahead of us .
I am absolutely sure of that . But it 's going to require not just what the president does , but what all of us do .
It 's going to require people once again being inspired by that spirit that has animated American history ; that we don't just diagnose our problems and complain about them we roll up our sleeves and we solve them .
And so for me , learning more about the lives of the people here and about what you want for your futures is critical to what kind of president I would like to be .
There 's nothing I take more seriously than that . So I 've said to people I 'm going to try to earn every vote I can and even if people don't vote for me in November , I 'm going to be with them and with you every single day .
So let me be clear : At a time when our energy sector is changing rapidly , we need to invest in coal communities .
We need to figure out how to bring new jobs and industries to them , and we need to stand up to the coal company executives trying to shirk their responsibilities to their workers and retirees .
The facts are clear : The energy market is changing here in America and around the world .
But coal is still part of our energy supply , although it produces far less of our electricity than it once did .
Even China is starting to burn less coal . That 's good for the planet , but it has hurt American coal exports from this region .
And no matter what some politicians tell you , these trends are here to stay .
You 've got solar panels , don't you , Art , on top of this brewery ?
We 're not going to go back to an energy system that looks like it did in the 20th century .
We know we need to protect our children 's health and futures by combating climate change and accelerating the transition to a clean energy economy .
But that is still a transition . Anyone who pretends we can flip a switch and be in the clean energy future tomorrow isn't being honest with you either .
So we need to try everything we can to cut carbon pollution .
That includes supporting cutting-edge work being done right here in Appalachia in institutions working on carbon capture and sequestration technology .
This is too important to take any possible solution off the table .
I believe if we 're going to go around the country talking about the benefits of a clean energy economy , which I have done for more than a year , then we have a responsibility to come to this region of our country and look people in the eye and talk about what that really means for your lives and livelihoods .
The impact on Appalachia is compounded by other economic challenges .
The Chinese are dumping cheap steel in our markets , trying to fix their domestic economic problems on the backs of American workers .
And a lot of families still haven't recovered from the Great Recession , which wiped out jobs , homes , and savings .
Yesterday , I met a man named Bo in West Virginia .
He was a maintenance planner in a mining operation in Mingo County .
He lost his job last fall . He showed me a picture of his three beautiful little children , a son and two daughters , and said he was trying to keep on a brave face for them , so they wouldn't know how worried he and his wife are .
West Virginians are proud people , Bo said .
We take pride in our faith in God . We take pride in our family .
We take pride in our jobs . We take pride in the fact that we 're hard workers .
So why , he asked , aren't there more programs in place already to help people like him ?
Why isn't there more help to turn to ? How are we going to get new jobs there not years from now , but right now ?
I 'll bet everybody in here knows somebody in the same boat .
And Bo was really clear . He 's a Republican ; he is not voting for me .
But I really don't care about that . We need to do better for Bo and his family and families like his across Appalachia and America , and that means that means coming together , making a real plan to invest in the foundations of a strong middle class , namely good jobs and quality education for our kids and a level playing field for American workers .
That 's what my plan for revitalizing communities here will do .
First , we 've got to honor our obligations to miners past and present and stand with the steelworkers who are fighting for their livelihoods right now .
For months , I 've been speaking out against the coal companies like Patriot and Peabody and Arch Coal that have tried to shirk their responsibilities to workers and retirees .
Miners , power plant workers and railroad employees deserve the benefits they 've earned and the respect of all Americans .
And among the 100,000 miners who died in the last century , we 've lost miners in this century too who are joined with them in sacrifice : the 29 brave men who perished at the Upper Big Branch Mine .
The owner of that mine , Don Blankenship , had neglected workers ' safety for years .
And because of weak laws , when he was finally caught , finally charged and finally convicted , he only received a one-year prison sentence .
One year , for 29 deaths . That is totally unacceptable .
We need to strengthen those laws and hold executives who neglect workers ' health and safety to account .
That is why I support two bills in front of Congress right now that Sherrod referenced : the Miners Protection Act and the Mine Safety Protection Act .
They are critical . They are critical to keeping faith with coal communities and protecting workers ' health and safety on the job .
I hope the Congress will pass them and the President will sign them as quickly as possible .
And by the way , I heard Mr. Blankenship was outside my event yesterday protesting me .
Well , if Donald Trump wants the support of someone like that , he can have it .
And at a time when Chinese cheating is killing American steel jobs , I am not going to leave our steelworkers to fend for themselves .
As president , I 'll make sure we step up and initiate cases against China before jobs are lost , not after .
And I intend to appoint a special trade prosecutor and push for stronger rule-of-origin standards so Chinese steel doesn't have back door to American markets , for example , as part of foreign cars .
And I oppose any effort to grant so-called market economy status to China because it would weaken our ability to stop China from dumping cheap steel on the global market .
It 's illegal and it 's hurting American workers , and we 've got to make it stop .
I am so proud to be standing up here with your senator because he has been on the front lines of this , and together , Sherrod , we 're going to make it happen .
Second , we need to invest in creating more good-paying jobs here in Appalachia .
We know this region is rich in assets far beyond coal .
We also know that economic development plans designed in Washington without local input will not deliver results for you and your families .
That 's why I want to support locally-driven priorities , not supplanting them .
My plan will create a new Coal Communities Challenge Fund to support investments by Appalachians , for Appalachians .
I was in Mingo County yesterday , in Williamson , I heard from members of the community who were talking about how they are trying to generate more small business to create more jobs .
They started an incubator to help local entrepreneurs get new ventures off the ground .
They knew that they needed better housing infrastructure , so they put people to work refurbishing homes and businesses .
They realized that many of their neighbors were struggling with opiate addiction and other chronic health issues like diabetes , so they opened a nonprofit health clinic .
Meanwhile , the county is stepping up by repurposing abandoned mine lands for new industrial park land that is bringing in and has the potential to bring in more big employers .
This is the kind of locally-driven development that I think can really work .
The federal government should do more to support it . Across the river from Williamson , in Kentucky , I learned about a company called BitSource .
It trains former miners to be computer programmers and matches them to jobs in Eastern Kentucky .
Silicon Valley tech companies are learning about these miners ' technical chops and hiring them .
Now this is not a silver bullet by any means , but it is helping .
And we need to grow that kind of creative , entrepreneurial approach .
Mix hardworking people skills that are needed . Created those jobs , attract investments .
And I 'll tell you what : With more access to fast , affordable and reliable broadband , we could do even more in this region .
I 'll tell you , eight years ago I spent a lot of time driving the roads of West Virginia .
I spent a lot of time yesterday and today riding the roads of West Virginia .
And you are disconnected . You are disconnected , though .
I mean West Virginia deserves just as much broadband access of any place else in America and so does southern Ohio and eastern Kentucky and all the rest of the region .
That is one of my goals just like we had to finish electrifying the country , because you know what happens .
You get utilities , they 'll go where the business is .
They don't want to be climbing mountains and crossing rivers to get to 10 people .
They want to go to cities and suburbs where it 's easy .
They want to come to a great university like this one where you 've got a lot of users .
We 've got to finish the job of connecting up America .
And I 'm convinced when we do we 're going to see a whole bunch of new small businesses and creative ideas be put into action .
And I do want to support what I learned about yesterday .
Let 's repurpose abandoned minelands and power plants to support new jobs , like the industrial park in Holden , West Virginia , which makes wood products on the site of a former coalmine .
And let 's expand the New Markets Tax Credit , something my husband started back in the 1990 's , to steer investment and private enterprise more to Appalachia .
Having a good job is about so much more than getting a paycheck .
It 's about dignity and a sense of purpose . I don't want young people to have to leave home to find those things
I want them to be able to stay right here in this region , be near their family and friends , and earn a good living .
Be able to give their kids a great life . You just shouldn't have to leave home when we 're in such a connected world now .
Let 's connect ourselves up , let 's get creative .
And I know we can create a really bright future .
And the third part of our plan for revitalizing Appalachian communities is investing in education and training .
More than ever , some form of advanced educationdoesn't have to be college or university , it can be technical education , apprenticeships , community colleges but it makes a real difference .
Now , we are going to make community college free and give all young people the chance to graduate debt free from any public college or university , like the University of Ohio .
We will make it easier to pay off existing student debt and , if you 're an entrepreneur , we 'll let you defer your student loan payments and pay no interest for up to three years while you get your business off the ground , because I want young people to take advantage of those opportunities .
I want to see young people be able to take advantage of incubators like ACENet here in Southeast Ohio .
It supports up to 30 startups every year . And if we multiply that , think of what we will create together .
But we have to make sure that people who don't go to college get the education and training they need to get a good job .
There are a lot of ways of doing that , but there are a lot of jobs out there .
Last number I saw was 1.2 million jobs for people with skills in the trades welders , tool and dye , machinists , and the like .
Now those jobs are not all in the same place , they 're spread across the country .
But when you think about that , the more people who have those skills , they can start their own businesses too .
So we 've got to really look hard at how we give every young person the chance to chart his or her own future .
Now , that begins earlier with good school and good teachers no matter what ZIP code your child lives in .
And that is that is a particular challenge for a lot of communities in the region , because when mines close , power plants shut down , steel mills go idle , school districts lose tax revenue .
Look at what 's happening in Waterford , Ohio . After a nearby power plant shut down , the school district lost more than a million dollars out of a $7 million annual budget .
They 've had to lay off dozens of teachers . And that is just no way to give our kids the education that they need .
So I 've been looking for ways that we can help .
And back in the 90s , when the timber industry was in decline in the Pacific Northwest , we started a federal program to keep local schools open as they faced declining tax revenues .
Let 's make a similar commitment to Appalachian communities by making sure that as coal and steel and other factories have problems , it 's not taken out on students and teachers .
And we 'll take a hard look at retraining programs , the last thing that anybody needs are more retraining programs for jobs that don't exist .
We have a whole bunch of those , let 's learn from programs that really work .
Yesterday , in Williamson , I met a young man named Brandon .
His dad was a miner , he always thought he would be too .
But then his dad lost his job and that got Brandon thinking about his future .
So while he was still in high school he learned about the training program offered by the Coalfield Development Corporation .
Workers there spend 33 hours a week on the job , getting paid ; six hours in the classroom working toward an associate 's degrees ; three hours learning life skills , like financial management .
So that 's the path Brandon is taking , and when he 's done , he 'll have concrete skills that employers want : A two-year degree , some money in the bank , and he 'll be able to build the kind of life that he 's wanted right in his hometown .
Fourth , and finally , we got to invest in families .
Raising a family is hard work anywhere and I think it 's harder today than it was not so long ago .
I talk to a lot of young parents . I 'm really zeroing in on this now as a new grandmother .
I pay attention to the struggles that young parents are facing .
No matter what level of income and education , there are different challenges .
And I think we 've got to be more helpful , we make it just about as hard to balance family and work as we can in this country .
That 's why we need paid family leave that supports families taking care of their loved ones .
And why we 've got to continue the work under the Affordable Care Act to provide quality , affordable health insurance , get the cost down , get more competition in the system .
And we need to look at specific problems like , for example , too many miners with black lung disease have been are denied the health care they need because coal company-funded lawyers and doctors withheld evidence or willfully misdiagnose them .
I know a little bit about this because way back in Arkansas when Bill and I were there teaching at the law school .
He took on a bunch of black lung disease cases , about a hundred of them as I recall .
He and I would travel to meet with the miners and their families to see what could be done to help them .
Unfortunately , the problems never stopped . We also know that this region loses too many young people .
They go to college , they go for work and they don't come back .
They don't see a way to make a living . Others stay and it 's a real struggle .
For many people , these problems are too big to bear .
So we have drug abuse , alcohol abuse and suicide all on the rise across Appalachia .
And , shockingly , for some especially middle-aged white women life expectancy is actually on the decline .
Apart from times of war , that 's never happened in the United States .
My husband and I have been talking about this for months when we saw the statistics .
People are dying from opioid abuse , from heroin . They 're dying from suicide , but I though Bill really put his finger on it .
He said , You know what they 're really dying of ?
They 're dying of a broken heart . This is a problem that should concern every American , we need to make a national effort .
We can't go on like this . We 've got to commit to treating substance disorders and mental health issues .
We should bring the same urgency and resources to bear as we do for heart disease or cancer .
Addiction isn't a moral it 's a disease . And mental health is just as important as physical health .
That 's what we 've got to commit ourselves to doing .
Now these are all complicated problems , they all intersect and here are no easy solutions .
But we can't just ignore them and we can't deny them .
We need a full-court press government , business , universities , community groups , advocates , people pulling together , learning from each other and that 's exactly what I want to do .
You know the ideas that I 'm putting out today are just a start .
I 'm going to take everything I 've heard these last two days , add it to everything else I 've heard over a lifetime and work with leaders like [ ] and others to come up with plans .
It is truly not worth running for and serving as President if you do not help struggling and striving Americans get ahead and stay ahead .
And of course it 's fair to ask what is the other side offering ?
Unfortunately it 's the same old trickle-down economics that has failed us before .
Donald Trump doesn't talk about it much on the campaign trail , but his tax plan would give $3.2 trillion to millionaires and billionaires .
The people in our society who need it the least .
You know what we could do with that kind of money .
We could make Social Security and Medicare solvent for the next 75 years for example .
We could repair , replace , and expand our entire national infrastructure .
I just don't get it . The other side wants to give that money to the rich , what a waste !
And they don't even bother to come up with solutions to most of the problems people talk to me about .
They say things like , Let 's get out of the EPA . Let 's get rid of the Department of Education . You know closing the EPA is not the answer to rebuilding a region as we transition to clean renewable energy .
And closing the Department of Education is not going to stop the Chinese from dumping steel or reverse the decline in jobs .
It won't fix the roads or keep schools open . So we 've got to stay focused on what we can do together and we know how do this , my friends .
I am absolutely committed to working with everybody . I think part of the job of being President is being the convener and chief .
Bring people to the White House , sit around a table , talk and listen to each other , maybe have a can of Jackie O 's beer to get things going .
Because we don't have time to waste . People are discouraged , people are disheartened .
People feel like our government , our politics and our economy have failed them .
So let 's make the wealthy pay their fair share , instead of giving them more tax breaks , let 's invest in Appalachia , give the families here the opportunities you deserve .
Now , I want to close with a letter I recently received from another young man in West Virginia , also by the name of Brandon .
There was a period of time that was a very popular name .
His Dad is also a retired miner . And here 's what he wrote :
The coal industry has always been up and down . We always made it through the tough times because of the people around us .
We know what it is to be a community here in West Virginia .
We come together when someone needs help . That 's not just his story .
That 's not just a West Virginia or Appalachian story .
That 's an American story . At our best , we pull together .
We lift each other up . I think it really does take a village to raise a child , to heal a community , to restore people 's faith in themselves and in our country and our future .
So we cannot allow ourselves to be divided against one another , to be set against one another , to have scapegoating and shaming and blaming and insulting instead of an honest candid , conversation about what we 're going to do together .
And so let 's commit ourselves to make sure all of our families can live lives of dignity , security and opportunity and we treat each other with respect even when we disagree .
Because we 're not always going to agree . And build that future that I see , a future of confidence and optimism , to break down all the barriers that are holding people back .
I 'm very excited about this . People ask me all the time ,
Well , how are you going to respond to all these attacks , all these names that you 're called ?
I said , Really ? It 's not like I haven't been dealing with that for 25 years .
Really ? Because it 's not about me , it 's about us .
I 'm going to stand up and fight for you .
I 'm going to be on the front lines for this country that I love , that has given me and my husband so much , that I want to make sure I can look in the eyes of my absolutely adorable , 19 month old grandchild and I can say ,
Honestly , you 're going to be given every opportunity , but
you know what 's great about this country , Charlotte ?
Every kid is going to be given every opportunity and we 're going to build a future that will take advantage of the talent and the hard work of every single one of our children .
Help me in this mission , Athens . Thank you !
God bless you ! Hello ! Hello , East L.A. !
I am so happy to be here . I want to thank Yamilex , who just introduced me .
Didn't she do an amazing job ? I also want to thank the elected officials who are here .
We 've got a great turnout Congresswoman Judy Chu , Congressman Xavier Becerra , L.A. County Supervisor Hilda Solis , California State Senate President Pro Tem Kevin de Len , Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti , and the president of East L.A. College , Marvin Martinez .
You know , I got to start by saying , on Cinco de Mayo , I can't think of a better place to be than right here .
We 're here because we all believe that we need to and we can and we must break down all the barriers that hold our people back .
And we are going to do that together because we should all rise together and share in the promise of America .
And the stakes in this election have never been higher .
Right ? Our next president has to meet three tests : Can you actually help families get ahead and stay ahead ?
Can you keep us safe ? And can you bring our country together ?
Well , Donald Trump fails all three of those tests .
With all the challenges we face in America and in the world , we can't have a loose cannon in the Oval Office .
That is a risk we cannot afford . Now , as president , creating good jobs and raising incomes will be my number one priority .
And we will follow the lead of California and raise the minimum wage across America .
And we will guarantee equal pay for women 's work .
I think that 's way overdue . How about you ?
And we 're going to also follow California 's lead and make sure we have paid family leave for working families .
I will do everything I can to make the economy work for everybody , to help more people lift themselves out of poverty , lift themselves into the middle class , and go as far as their hard work and talents will take them .
I will also fight to make sure that every child has a good school and a good teacher , no matter where that child lives .
And we are going to fight for comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship .
I will fight for that reform , but the first thing I will do is to preserve DACA and DAPA .
We 're going to end raids and roundups . We 're going to keep families together .
We know we 've got work to do , but I think winning the election will really set that in motion .
Don't you ? We also not only have to work for comprehensive immigration reform , we have to recognize that the kind of language coming from Donald Trump is hateful and we need to repudiate it .
Now , every election is a choice , and just yesterday , Donald Trump doubled down on his plan to create a deportation force to round up millions of people .
That 's actually what he said . He has pledged in his first days in office to scrap DACA and DAPA and to finalize a design for a giant wall on the border .
Well , the best way to prevent that from happening is to make sure he never gets near the White House .
Now , I am absolutely committed to doing this , and I need your help .
We have a primary here in California . I need everybody to get focused and work hard and talk to your friends , your neighbors , your families .
We have to turn out a big vote on June the 7th .
And in fact , starting next week you can vote by mail .
You can vote by going down to the City Hall or the county house and saying you want to vote .
So we have to get everybody . There are no excuses .
We 've got to get everybody to vote . And I hope you will tell people their futures are at stake .
I cannot imagine a starker choice . On the economy , I mean , honestly , Donald Trump actually says that wages are too high in America .
I have no idea who he 's talking to . Do you ?
He says we shouldn't raise the minimum wage . I 'd like to see him live on $7.25 an hour !
I am proud to be campaigning in California , and I am proud to have the support of so many unions , including the United Farm Workers .
I think this crowd is ready , aren't you ? But I can't do it without you .
That 's why when you leave here you 've got to keep working to reach out to as many people as you can .
I want you to go to hillaryclinton.com and join this campaign .
We are competing for every vote in every state , but particularly here in California because I know that winning big in California will put us on the path to winning big in November .
Now , you know , somebody asked me the other day somebody said ,
Well , why are you so pro-immigration ? Why are you so focused on making sure that we take care of the families that are here in our country and the people who have worked so hard ?
And there is really two reasons that I want to tell you .
One , because it 's right , and it 's what we do as Americans .
We are a nation of immigrants , and I am proud of it .
We are stronger together , and our diversity is one of our strengths .
So when people condemn or scapegoat or criticize or demagogue about immigrants , I wonder where are they living ?
What do they know about how we have built this country ?
We are a great country in part because we are a nation of immigrants .
But there 's another more personal reason . When I was about 11 or 12 years old , I was asked by my church outside of Chicago to volunteer to babysit on Saturday mornings because we had so many migrant farm workers in the fields around Chicago .
If you go to Chicago now , you can't imagine that .
But when I was growing up , there were so many farms .
They 're all developed now , you 've got a huge airport , but not in those days .
And so every Saturday the parents and the aunts and the uncles would take the older children to the fields and leave the younger children there , and they needed babysitters .
So I said , Yeah , absolutely . And my mother drove me and another girl out there to the camp where the families were living .
They came out of Mexico , they came up through Texas , they came up through the Midwest , they came into the Chicago area , they went up to Michigan .
Then , when they finished the harvest , they stayed or they went home .
And , you know , when people think about that , I want them to think that they were working hard to make a good living for their families .
Just like they are today working hard to make a good living .
And I think it 's time we treated everybody in this country with respect , with kindness , with love .
And I also think we 'd be a lot better off if we actually talked to each other instead of yelling at each other .
Let the other side do the yelling . We 're going to be talking and rolling up our sleeves and getting to work , because it 's not enough to diagnose the problem , we need to solve the problems .
So you are great to be here with me today .
I love the enthusiasm and the energy . Let 's keep that going through June 7 .
And then , after a few days off , let 's get geared up again and go to the election in November .
Are you ready , East LA ? Let 's have a great election .
Let 's shape the future we want for ourselves , our children , and our grandchildren .
Thank you , all , and God bless you . Well , thank you all for coming and having this conversation with me .
It 's clear that there are so many challenges facing young families today that we have to come to grips with , and we have to work together to try to find the best menu of options .
Because there is just no one-size-fits-all ' . People have different needs : childcare needs , sometimes even more as Shanda and I were just talking about even more challenging with special needs kids , and how we start early and provide that sort of support .
For some it 's family leave , and particularly the absence of paid family leave , because that makes it more difficult to deal with everything from newborns to aging relatives .
Others , it 's just a continuing stress of a workplace that doesn't provide enough compensation with rising incomes .
There still is a challenge with equal pay for women , which is it 's not made up .
There are lots of concerns in the workplace that I 'm hearing about increasingly about the work day never ends , the schedules are often unpredictable .
And even when you think you 're gaining some control over that work day it 's subject to so many variables that are out of your control , and often end up throwing big monkey wrenches into what should be your family time and your efforts to try and organize and stick with that .
So I hear about this all over the country , and I really want to talk about it and hear from you more than me talking .
Because there are some obvious , maybe even typical , responses , but I 'm trying to get a much broader view about what will work .
These are issues that I 've worked on for a really long time , going back to my own life as a mother , a daughter , and some of the challenges there but also in the work that I 've done for the Children 's Defense Fund , and other ways of trying to figure out how we have a more cohesive , and frankly welcoming , set of expectations and supports for families in today 's world .
Because it 's just harder , I think . It 's just my take .
I think costs are greater . Everything from commuting time to feeling like if you take that vacation day , you 're going to be viewed as slacking off .
I mean they are just they are cultural as well as economic and structural challenges , so I 'm just very interested in hearing what all of you might have to say .
Good afternoon , everyone ! I am delighted to be back here , and I want to send greetings to everyone , particularly to Reverend Sharpton and to the board , to Reverend Richardson and all of those who work with him , to Melanie Campbell , to my longtime friend Hazel Dukes , and to all who are gathered here today .
It is wonderful to be back at the National Action Network for the 25th anniversary of your work on the frontlines of our nation 's continuing struggle for civil rights .
You stand up and always have against gun violence , advocate for criminal justice reform , help young people find jobs , hold corporations accountable , and in a million ways , lift up voices that too often go unheard .
So for me , it 's great being back in New York and wonderful being here .
And I appreciate Reverend Sharpton introducing the mothers and other loved ones of those whom we we have lost , people who are joined in a club of grief that none of us ever want to be members of .
And I am grateful for their witness and their extraordinary commitment to criminal justice reform , to common sense gun reforms , and so much else .
You know , on Monday , at a celebration of Jackie Robinson , who played his first game for the Brooklyn Dodgers 69 years ago this week , Reverend Sharpton said ,
America was never the same . Well , I think it 's fair to say that holds true for the National Action Network as well .
And I want you to imagine what Jackie Robinson would say if he could see us now .
The decades since he put down his glove have brought remarkable progress : the rise of the black middle class , the tremendous leadership of African Americans in all walks of life in business , in law , to government , science , the arts , all the professions , and , of course , Barack and Michelle Obama in the White House .
But , as you know so well , the last few years also have laid bare deep fault lines in America .
They 've revealed how frayed our bonds of trust and respect have become .
Despite our best efforts and our highest hopes , America 's long struggle with racism is far from finished .
And we are seeing that in this election . When the frontrunner for the Republican nomination was asked in a national television interview to disavow David Duke and other white supremacists supporting his campaign , he played coy .
This is the same Donald Trump who led the insidious birther movement to delegitimize President Obama .
He has called Mexican immigrants rapists and murderers . He wants to ban all Muslims from entering the United States .
And the list goes on . And not to be outdone by his primary rival , Ted Cruz would treat Muslim Americans like criminals and religiously profile their neighborhoods .
So , ugly currents that lurked just below the surface of our politics have burst into the open .
And everyone sees this bigotry for what it is . Therefore , it is up to all of us to repudiate it .
Here in New York , we don't all look the same , sound the same , or worship the same .
But we have learned over the years that America 's problems won't be solved by building walls and dividing our country between us and them .
We know our diversity is a strength , not a weakness .
And New York represents the best of American values , despite what some on the other side have said and that we have to constantly challenge ourselves to stand up and face all that we still have to overcome .
Now of course , the problem goes far deeper than Donald Trump or Ted Cruz .
More than half a century after Rosa Parks sat , and Dr. King marched , and John Lewis bled , race still plays a significant role in determining who gets ahead in America and who gets left behind .
There 's something wrong , my friends , when the median wealth for black families is a tiny fraction of the median wealth for white families , when African Americans are still more likely to be denied a mortgage .
Something 's wrong when black kids get arrested for petty crimes but white kids who do the same things don't .
Something 's wrong when gun violence is by far the leading cause of death for young black men , outstripping the next nine causes of death combined .
Something 's wrong when so many black parents are burying their children .
Imagine if a white baby in parts of our country was twice as likely to die before her first birthday than a black baby .
Imagine the outcry and the resources that would flood in to save those babies .
These are not only problems of economic inequality . They are also problems of racial inequality .
And it is time we face up to the reality of systemic racism in all of its forms .
And once we do , we are called to come together to break down all the barriers that still hold African-Americans back from fully participating in our economy and our society and together , to build ladders of opportunity and empowerment in their place .
As I have said many times , white Americans need to do a much better job of listening when African-Americans talk about the seen and unseen barriers you face every day .
We need to recognize our privilege and practice humility , rather than assume our experiences are everyone else 's experiences .
We need to try , as best we can , to walk in your shoes , to imagine what it would be like to sit down our son or daughter down and have the talk , or if people followed us around stores , or locked their car doors when we walked past .
This is a discipline that I have recognized and tried to practice in my own life ever since my Methodist youth minister took our Methodist youth fellowship group from our nearly-all white suburb to worship with black and Latino children in Chicago and to hear Dr. King speak .
And then , in my first semester at law school , I met a woman named Marian Wright Edelman .
Marian was actually here with me the last time I spoke at the National Action Network in 2007 .
Many of you know her story . She was the first black woman admitted to the Mississippi bar , a lawyer for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund in Jackson , a friend of Dr. King 's and Robert Kennedy 's before they were assassinated , altogether a remarkable leader .
Until I met Marian , I wasn't clear how to channel my faith and commitment to social justice to make both a living and a difference in the world .
I went to work for her at the Children 's Defense Fund .
She sent me to her home state of South Carolina to investigate the problem of black teenagers being incarcerated in adult jails .
And when I look back at everything else I 've done , whether it was going undercover in Alabama as a young woman to help expose segregated academies and strip them of their tax exemptions , or running a legal clinic at the University of Arkansas to represent prison inmates and poor families , it was all part of the same mission : to fight injustice and even the odds for those who have the odds stacked against them in life and in our society .
That was true when , as first lady , I worked with both Republicans and Democrats in Congress to create the Children 's Health Insurance Program that covers 8 million children .
It was true when , as the senator from New York , I worked with parents and doctors and community leaders to take on the epidemic of children 's asthma in Harlem and the Bronx .
It was true when I worked with the organization 100 Black Men to create the Eagle Academy , a public school here in New York City whose mission is serving young black and Latino men .
Or when I joined partners in New York , the congressional delegation , like Charlie Rangel and Greg Meeks to bring jobs and investment to underserved neighborhoods and worked with leaders including my great friend , the late Stephanie Tubbs Jones , to protect voting rights .
It was true when I went to David Dinkins 's annual conference at Columbia University last year and gave the first policy speech of my presidential campaign about reforming our criminal justice system and ending the era of mass incarceration .
So what I have tried to do , what I intend to keep doing with your help , is to refuse to accept as normal the fact that black men today are far more likely to be stopped and searched by police , charged with crimes , and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men convicted of the same offenses .
And we have seen the toll that takes on families torn apart by excessive incarceration and children growing up in homes shattered by prison and poverty .
I don't claim to have all the answers , but I do know how important it is that we address these issues .
And I applaud the National Action Network for being the champion of this cause and helping to build momentum for reform .
As your senator , I fought against racial profiling and the disparity in sentencing between crack and powder cocaine .
As your president , I 'll work with you to lead a national effort for end-to-end reform in our criminal justice system , and I will appoint an attorney general who will continue the courageous work of Eric Holder and Loretta Lynch , two New Yorkers !
Now everyone , everyone in every community benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone is respected by the law .
So we have to rebuild the bonds of trust between law enforcement and the communities they serve and stop the tragedy of black men and women being killed by police or dying in custody .
Every day , here in New York and all over America , there are many police officers inspiring trust and confidence , putting themselves on the line to save lives .
So let 's learn from those police and departments that are doing it right and apply those lessons across the country , and make sure the Justice Department has the resources to hold them accountable when they do it wrong .
Reforming our criminal justice system , though , is just the beginning of our work .
Over the course of my campaign , including in February at the Schomburg Center in Harlem , I have been laying out a comprehensive agenda for equity and opportunity for black communities .
Mass incarceration is just one part of a broader set of interlocking challenges , because years of underinvestment and neglect have hollowed out many predominantly African-American communities .
There aren't enough jobs , and poverty persists from generation to generation .
Not enough families , still today , have access to the education their children they deserve , the affordable housing they need to live in .
Infrastructure has been allowed to crumble , even if it was ever built before .
A recent report found the economic impact of widespread inequality in education to be the equivalent of a permanent national recession .
That 's a pretty good description of what it 's like to live in a community that 's been repeatedly left out and left behind .
And reports of economic recovery , which are real , because I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for digging us out of the ditch the Republicans put us in in the first place , has given us a strong foundation to go further .
So , now we need a truly comprehensive approach to how we lift everybody up .
That 's why I am proposing a major , $125 billion Breaking Every Barrier Agenda to revitalize and empower communities of color and places where unemployment and poverty remain stubbornly high from inner cities to poor rural areas , from Appalachia to Indian Country .
The pillars of this agenda match many of the challenges that the National Action Network has also taken on .
It has to start with a strategy to create more good jobs .
So my plan devotes $20 billion specifically to help young people find work and $5 billion to help people who have paid their debt to society find jobs and support when they get out of prison .
We 're going to make more strategic investments in transit and infrastructure to connect black communities to areas where good-paying jobs actually are .
On Sunday , I was in Baltimore , where the NAACP is fighting the cancellation of a much-needed rail line that would have made it easier for African Americans in low-income neighborhoods to access economic opportunities in other parts of the city .
They say transportation is a civil rights issue and I agree .
And we 're going to support black entrepreneurs , especially black women , who are a powerful entrepreneurial force to get the capital they need to start and grow small businesses , because that 's where a majority of the jobs will come from .
We 'll invest in education and apprenticeships . And it is outrageous that 60-plus years after
Brown v . Board of Education , our public schools are more segregated by race and income than they were in 1968 .
We have to replace the school-to-prison pipeline with a cradle-to-college pipeline , because in America , every child should have a good teacher and a good school , no matter what ZIP code they live in .
And families , families need safe , affordable places to live .
Black and Latino families are disproportionately affected by the crisis of affordable housing in New York and other cities across America .
That 's forced thousands of people out of the neighborhoods where they lived for years .
Meanwhile , public housing is under enormous pressure . Over the past 15 years , federal funding for the New York City Housing Authority has declined by nearly 30 percent .
So as part of our Breaking Every Barrier Agenda , we 're going to make affordable housing a priority .
We will defend and expand the current supply of Low-Income Housing Tax Credits .
We 'll boost funding for Section 8 vouchers and give recipients more choice in deciding where to live .
And because African-American homeownership has long been one of the surest ways to fund and build wealth , we 'll match up to $ 10,000 in savings for a down payment .
Now there 's one more part of this agenda the reverend asked me to be substantive .
Well , I 'm giving it to you . Because , you know what ?
When somebody asks for your vote , they should tell you what they 're going to do , not what they hope to do .
And they should tell you to hold them accountable , which I want you to .
Because it is important that we do this together . I want to just talk very briefly about an issue that doesn't get enough attention .
That is the challenge of environmental justice . Now , we all know what happened in Flint .
Children drinking and bathing in toxic water for nearly two years because their governor wanted to save a little money .
Parents held up bottles of brown , murky water and said , something 's wrong here , but their concerns were dismissed and belittled .
Well , let me tell you , Flint is not alone .
There are a lot of Flints across our country where children are exposed to polluted air , unhealthy water , and chemicals that can increase cancer risk .
And like Flint , they tend to be places that are home to poor people and people of color .
What happened to Flint would never have happened in a wealthy suburb of Detroit .
It is no coincidence that black children are twice as likely as white children to suffer from asthma , three times more likely to be hospitalized , and five times more likely to die from the disease .
Or that children of color are more likely than white kids to suffer lead poisoning , which can lead to lifelong learning challenges and even behavioral problems .
It is no coincidence that nearly half of all Latinos in the United States live in places where the air does not even meet EPA public health standards .
Or that race is the single biggest factor determining whether you live near a toxic site , from asthma alley in the Bronx to cancer alley in Louisiana .
And you know what climate change is going to make these burdens even heavier .
So today , I 'm announcing a new plan to fight for environmental justice across America .
When President Obama and I both were in the Senate , we worked together on legislation aimed at getting harmful lead out of child care facilities , classrooms and homes with children .
Now I want to set an ambitious national goal to eliminate lead as a major public threat within five years .
Some say , Well , that 's awfully ambitious .
I say , if we put our minds to it , we can get it done .
Let 's set that goal , and then let 's get everybody moving forward to achieve it .
We know how to do the work , all we need is the will .
And let 's push polluters to pay for cleaning up hundreds of thousands of toxic sites across America .
When I was in Senate , I helped pass a law to clean up brownfields and worked to bring together developers , environmentalists , and local leaders from across New York to redevelop blighted properties .
Let 's take that work nationwide . Let 's reduce air pollution and combat climate change by investing in clean energy and clean transportation .
And oh , by the way , we 'll put a lot of people to work .
As part of a major national infrastructure strategy , let 's protect health and safety by repairing not only what we can see but what we can't , like the failing water systems , run-down public housing , and crumbling schools .
Right now in the Detroit public schools , there are children in classrooms breathing the toxins from mold and there are rodents sharing their space .
And even here in New York , we know we 've got problems .
Let 's do more , like Philadelphia did , when it installed green roofs and porous pavements to keep sewers from backing up into low-income neighborhoods .
Now you don't have to look too far to see what this means for people .
A woman named Michelle Holmes is here with us today .
She 's lived in the Polo Grounds Towers in Harlem for decades .
She does daily battle with roaches , vermin , and other pests .
And then the chemicals used to exterminate them cause other problems .
Her family has frequent asthma attacks that often land them in the hospital .
And then there 's the mold brown and green spots on the bathroom ceiling .
No one should have to live like that in America .
Every child and every family in America deserves clean air to breathe , clean water to drink , and a safe and healthy place to live .
This a justice issue . It 's a civil rights issue .
And as president , it will be a national priority for us .
So my friends , throughout this campaign , and then as president , I 'm going to keep fighting to break down all the barriers holding back every American .
My door will always be open to you . You will always have a friend and a partner in the White House .
See , I believe that Democrats have a special obligation .
If we 're going to ask African Americans to vote for us , we can't take you or your vote for granted .
We can't just show up at election time and say the right things and think that 's enough .
We can't start building relationships a few weeks before a vote .
We have to demonstrate a sustained commitment to building opportunity , creating prosperity and righting wrongs not just every two or four years , not just when the cameras are on and people are watching , but every single day .
I have worked on these causes all my adult life .
I 'm going to keep going at it no matter what .
And I want to close today by paying tribute to some extraordinary women who are here with us who inspire me every day to fight harder , work longer , and never , ever give up .
You heard their names , when Reverend Sharpton introduced them , but I 've gotten to know some of them personally , and have had the great honor of spending time with them .
Gwen Carr from here in New York , the mother of Eric Garner , who was stopped for selling loose cigarettes on the street and ended up dead .
Sybrina Fulton , the mother of Trayvon Martin , shot and killed in Florida just for walking through the development where his own father lived .
Valerie Bell , mother of Sean Bell , shot and killed by police here in New York on the morning of his wedding day .
And Nicole Bell , his fiancee who would have married Sean that fateful day .
All these women and the others who are here , the family members of those who have been lost , not only by police action but by gun violence of any kind , anywhere .
The man who killed Trayvon Martin should have never had a gun in the first place .
All of these women and other family members have endured unimaginable pain .
I look at them and wonder whether I would have been that strong and resilient .
Their grief is unimaginable but they have not been broken .
Instead , they are channeling their sorrow into a strategy and their mourning into a movement .
They are standing up for criminal justice reform and they are standing up against the epidemic of gun violence that takes on average , 90 people a day .
That is 33,000 people a year killed by guns in America every year .
Now , my opponent , who will be speaking to you tomorrow , and I don't see this the same way .
But , I think this is a national emergency , and I 'm going to do everything I can to take on the gun lobby and to try to save lives , the lives of the children of women like this and the sisters and the brothers and the daughters and the sons of so many others .
And I will work as hard as I can as your president to keep faith with them for police reform and demanding a criminal justice system that actually delivers justice .
They 're living what the Scripture tells us : Let us not grow weary in doing good , for in due season we shall reap if we do not lose heart .
These are words to live by , and I believe these are words to govern by .
Think of the future we can build if we work together and don't grow weary doing good .
The men on both sides of me have not grown weary .
This organization has not grown weary . It is our obligation and our challenge not to grow weary either until every American has the dignity , the justice , and the opportunity they deserve .
That 's the future we should want for our children and our country .
That 's why I 'm asking for your support in this election , starting on the primary on Tuesday .
And that 's why we will roll up our sleeves and we will get results that will make us proud to be standing together for the kind of future that every child in this country deserves to have .
Thank you , and God bless you . Thank you so much , Maxine .
Didn't she do great ? That is a terrific story .
Wow , what a way to start . I am excited and happy to be back in Staten Island with all of you .
I had the greatest honor and delight in representing you for eight years .
And it just is always so , I don't know , heartwarming for me to come here .
This is a place of neighborhoods . This is a place where people still try to have Sunday dinner with their families .
This is a place that holds each other up and supports each other .
I saw that most tragically after 9/11 , when we lost so many of our first responders , our firefighters , our police officers and others , and so many from families here in Staten Island .
So coming back , for me , is a way of saying thank you .
Thank you for the people here , what you stand for , who you are .
I actually think Staten Island values are New York values , and New York values are American values .
I want to thank John Gulino , the Staten Island Democratic County chair ; Debi Rose , councilmember ; Matt Titone , assembly member ; Mike Cusick , assembly member ; your state senator , who I 've had the privilege of knowing for a long time now , Diane Savino ; and Public Advocate Tish James .
Thank you all for being here with me . I also want to thank this wonderful place for welcoming us here on this bright spring afternoon .
Thank you for letting us be here and be part of Staten Island 's history , which is so storied and impressive , and something that gives I think a lot of texture to this borough and what it stands for .
We have a big election on Tuesday the Democratic primary .
And I 'll tell you what I see : I see this overall election , this 2016 presidential election , as one of the most consequential we 've had in a long time .
Now , everybody who runs for office says something like that , but let me tell you what I mean : We are seeing a very distinct difference between the visions of what we can achieve as Americans , the values that should keep motivating and uniting us , and a divisive , mean-spirited rhetoric that sets people against each other .
Now , I am all for tough political battles . People who have different political views , arguing it out .
When I ran in 2000 , I didn't carry Staten Island .
When I ran in 2006 , I did because we spent our time getting to know each other , listening to each other .
So I 've got no problem with people having political disagreements .
That 's in America 's DNA , isn't it ? But what I absolutely worry about is deliberate efforts to set Americans against each other .
That 's especially important in this city and state , because we are a diverse group of folks .
We don't all look alike . We don't all sound alike .
We don't all worship alike . But we 're united in our own efforts to get ahead and stay ahead and help others along the way .
So when we have candidates running for president on the Republican side who are deliberately inciting divisiveness who are insulting whole groups of Americans ; who are saying things like build the walls , not the bridges , the walls ; make it impossible for some people to come to this country because of their religion , a country founded on religious liberty when we see that , it really bothers me .
Because I begin to think : We are the most extraordinary invention in all of human history this democracy of ours that has kept going longer than any other anywhere , this nation of immigrants with Lady Liberty in the harbor welcoming people , this place where opportunity is still available .
Just as you heard Maxine say , every one of us could tell a story of a hard time , me included every single one of us .
But America has always had our back . Are we perfect ?
No . But are we better than anywhere else and are we already great ?
The answer is yes . I am sick and tired of people running for president who view our country through a negative lens .
Part of what we have to do every election is actually look at our problems and figure out how we 're going to solve them .
It is not enough to diagnose the problem . A lot of people can do that .
We need people who are going to roll up our sleeves and get to work on solutions .
That is what I tried to do for eight years as your senator .
When Maxine mentioned the Children 's Health Insurance Program I helped to start that when I was first lady because , call it boring , but I think it 's important to actually help people if you hold a public trust , and that 's what I 've tried to do .
And that 's what I will continue to do if you give me the honor of serving as your president .
I know what it 's like to be knocked down .
I understand that completely . And I understand , too , what it is to get yourself back up like Maxine did , and like I bet so many of you in this crowd have done .
The question is not whether you get knocked down . It 's whether you stay down .
And for every problem we 've got in America right now , there are solutions .
So I 'm done with the hand-wringing and all the negative talk .
I am done with people saying America 's best days are behind us .
I 'm done with that . Because here 's what I see : When I ran for senate , the people of New York took a chance on me .
I will never forget that . You had no basis for doing that .
Well , it turned out pretty well . But it was within my first year serving as your senator that 9/11 happened , and the necessity of pulling together drove everything we did .
We had a Republican mayor , we had a Republican governor , we had a Republican president .
I did not for one minute stop and say to myself ,
Well , I don't know . Can we work together ?
How absurd is that ? We were facing a crisis of unbelievable proportions .
We had 3,000 people murdered and we pulled together .
Politics was totally left behind . I 'll tell you , I criticize George W . Bush .
I criticize him because I didn't like the way that he took the economy he inherited from my husband 23 million new jobs and incomes going up for everybody and drove us into a ditch .
I didn't like that . But I 'll tell you , when we needed him when Chuck Schumer and I were in that Oval Office on the Thursday after 9/11 , and he asked us what we needed , and we were just the two of us , with the two senators from Virginia , because the Pentagon had been attacked , and I said , We need $20 billion , Mr. President , to rebuild New York , to take care of families , we didn't yet know about all the health consequences , which I then later spent much of my Senate years dealing with , but we said , We need $20 billion . he said , You 've got it .
And despite intense Republican pressure to back down , he never did .
So I publicly say , Thank you , President George W . Bush , for making sure we got the money that we needed to rebuild our city .
I have no time for people who are partisan for the sake of being partisan , who point fingers from whatever side of the political divide .
America is always challenged to move forward , to maintain that opportunity and freedom that is at the core of who we are .
That shouldn't be partisan . We can again , we can disagree about the best way to create good jobs with rising incomes , the best way to ensure that every child in every zip code has a good teacher and a good school , the best way to make sure everybody gets the health care they need , the best way to make sure Social Security is there for future generations .
I have no problem with a good debate . What I don't understand is folks who think it 's their way or no way , people who believe that only they have access to the truth .
Well , as your secretary of state , I went to 112 countries , and I 'll tell you what : A lot of those places were run by dictators , authoritarian regimes , theocracies that thought they had a monopoly on the truth .
You don't want to go there ; you sure don't want to live there .
But we have to remind ourselves every election is what 's at stake .
And what 's at stake is whether or not we 're going to keep making progress together .
So that 's why I 've laid out plans , because I want you to know what I intend to do plans for getting more jobs , infrastructure jobs , advanced manufacturing jobs , combating climate change with clean , renewable energy jobs .
And some people look , I do understand some people actually make fun of that .
They say , Oh , there she goes with her plans .
Why doesn't she just get up and rant and rail and well , you know , I like to do that every so often .
But I want you to know what I think we can do together .
I 've set some big goals for clean , renewable energy .
Let 's deploy half a billion more solar panels and have enough clean energy to provide electricity to every home in America in 10 years .
And let 's do more to help small business . Staten Island is a borough of small businesses ; let 's do more to help small businesses .
It 's out of small businesses that we 're going to get about two-thirds of the new jobs , and I am proud that New York has led the way with a minimum wage increase , so people who work full time are not mired in poverty .
And I do want to finally guarantee equal pay for women 's work .
I got to tell you , this this , of course , is a women 's issue , but it 's not just a women 's issue ; it 's a family issue .
If you have a wife , a mother , a sister , a daughter who is working and is not being treated fairly when it comes to pay and benefits in the workplace , the family suffers , the economy suffers .
Now , I 've been shopping my entire that 's a long time and I 've never gotten up to the cashier at the supermarket or at the department store or anywhere else where they say ,
Okay , you 're a white woman , you only have to pay 78 cents on the dollar ; or
You 're a black woman , you only have to pay 68 cents ; or
You 're a Latina woman , you only have to pay 58 cents .
That 's not the way it works . People who work and do the job should get equal pay , and that should not even be debatable .
And I am absolutely committed to improving education , because , as you heard Maxine , it is still the pathway .
But I want to make a couple of points that probably you haven't heard about education .
First , we need early childhood education , and I 'm glad New York City is providing universal pre-k for the kids here .
And the early studies show that it 's making a difference for a lot of kids .
We need to do that . Every child should be prepared to learn when he or she gets to school .
And then once we get elementary and secondary school , I want to work with and support our teachers who are doing that important job for all of us .
There has just been too much scapegoating , too much criticism , and in fact , I think that we 've got work to do to make sure we are going to recruit and keep the teachers of the next generation .
And it will be essential if we 're going to be competitive in the world .
Thirdly , we 're going to make college affordable . I have a plan for debt-free tuition .
And I do want to make community college free , because there 's a lot of skills you can acquire in community to go immediately to work .
And I really want to stress two other points . One , not everybody has to go to college .
There are a lot of good jobs that we need filled by people .
We 've got to provide the apprenticeship programs , and I want to boost what labor unions are doing to provide more apprenticeship operations .
There are currently about 1.2 million jobs in this country for machinists and welders and tool and die makers and other skilled labor .
And very often , these are good union jobs , which is at the core of the middle class .
So let 's do more to encourage more people to go that route .
And I have a plan to help you refinance your student debt .
If you can refinance your mortgage or your car payment , why can't you refinance your student debt ?
And we 're going to make it possible for you to do that .
We 're going to get the cost down and we 're going to put a date certain where the payments end .
Because honestly , it should be an investment in our future that we are helping young people get their education .
I do not think the federal government should be making money off of lending money to send young people to college .
And we 're going to build on the Affordable Care Act .
Before there was something called Obamacare , there was something called Hillarycare .
And I really tried hard and I got my head handed to me by the drug companies and the insurance companies .
I love it when all these other folks , including my opponent in the primary , talks about taking on the interests and where were you ?
I mean , really , we were fighting tooth and nail trying to get universal health care coverage passed .
But we got to improve it . We 've got to get the costs down out-of-pocket costs , deductibles , copays .
We need more competition . And we have to go after and win this time against the drug companies to get drug costs under control .
I am excited about all the work we can do together .
And I know that it 's not easy . I understand that .
But anybody asking for your vote should be able to tell you what they want to do to meet the test of , can you improve people 's lives ?
Can you provide a positive difference ? And the second test is , can you keep us safe ?
Now , maybe we take that more seriously here in New York , but we should .
And we are going to do everything we can to keep America safe .
And I am so proud of the way New York pulled together after 9/11 , and has stayed focused , to make sure that we do everything possible to protect ourselves .
That 's why it really bothers me when you hear Trump talking about no Muslims coming to the United States .
We have to defeat the terrorists . That is my goal .
And how are we going to do that ? Well , we 're going to do it in coalition with other nations European nations , Arab nations , some of whom are actually Muslim nations .
I know how hard it is to put together a coalition because I put together the coalition that brought Iran to the negotiating table , including Russia and China .
It took me a year and a half . We got it done , and then we negotiated a deal .
And I can tell you this I think it 's kind of common sense : It 's harder to put a coalition together if you 've got somebody running for president of the United States who insults the religion of the nations you 're trying to get into your coalition .
And it 's very clear people around the world are paying close attention to this election .
I 'm getting a lot of incoming questions and messages like ,
What is going on ? And I say ,
Oh , don't worry about it . The American people will never vote for that .
And then I cross my fingers and cross my heart and pray to God .
And then Ted Cruz comes along and has the brilliant idea exactly , the perfect Staten Island response to the mention of his name .
So Ted Cruz comes along and says , Oh , we need special police patrols of Muslim neighborhoods in America .
Now , I think the two best responses to that idiocy which actually is not only offensive , it 's dangerous , because we need everybody to report anything they think is suspicious ; that 's how we keep ourselves safe so the two best responses : Number one was one of the chiefs of the force of the NYPD who I lived his understatement he said ,
Well , so what am I supposed to do with the 1,000 American Muslim police officers ?
And then Bill Bratton 's comment : He does not know what the hell he 's talking about .
So in order to keep us safe , as any president must do , we need to have close connections with everybody .
And everybody needs to be encouraged : You see something suspicious , you hear something suspicious , you call , NYPD , FBI , or wherever you might be in the country .
That 's what we 've been doing , and we 've got to keep doing it .
And we don't need divisive rhetoric that excludes and marginalizes any community .
The third big test that is facing the next president is how are you going how are you going to unify our country ?
Now , I 'll tell you my experience , both as first lady and senator and as secretary of state .
There 's nothing easy about doing this . But I will go anywhere , any time , to meet with anyone to find common ground .
When we talk about the CHIP program , that was that was because we got Democrats and Republicans to work together .
And 8 million children , like Maxine 's child , get the health insurance they need , regardless of the challenges facing their families .
When I was your senator , I told you we had to work with Republicans , and I gladly did so to make sure we got what we needed .
And then , as I began to hear from firefighters , and police officers , and construction workers , and EMTs , and volunteers people who had run toward danger , who had stayed there , some of whom were assigned there , some of whom were part of the cleanup , and after months of exposure to the toxins they began to suffer ; you know that , there are people you know , or you know somebody who knows , right here on Staten Island and
so I went and I said to the Bush administration ,
In this case I 'm not happy about it . Something wrong is going on , and we need to help .
And they denied it . Nothing wrong with the air .
No problems . I held a hearing downtown near the ferry and had people come in and tell me their stories , have experts come in .
I knew there was something wrong . And we began to work , and we built a coalition .
And finally we got the Zadroga Act passed , and finally we made sure that we 're not turning our backs on anybody .
Anybody who was there , anybody who stayed there , anybody who worked there : We will never turn our backs .
And certainly , as president , if I 'm so fortunate enough to be there , you can count on that .
We will continue to provide whatever health care is needed .
And what I have found over all these years is you just gotta get up every day trying to see whether you can find somebody who will work with you .
Actually , when I have these jobs , Republicans say nice things about me .
Yeah , they do . I 'm a good colleague .
I 'm easy to work with . Because I tell them , look .
I will seek common ground , but I 'll stand my ground .
I think that 's the combination that you want in an elected representative .
So that 's what I 'm interested in all of these contentious problems .
What are we going to do to get comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship ?
What are we going to do to take on the gun lobby to get comprehensive gun safety measures to keep guns out of the hands of people who shouldn't have them in the first place ?
These are contentious issues . I make no bones about that .
They 're contentious . But they don't get solved by people just yelling at each other .
You got to come together . You got to sit down .
You 've got to spend the hours listening and then working toward some kind of solution .
That 's what I promise you . I 'm telling you what I will do .
You can go to my website and read about it .
I 'm also telling you everything I 've proposed I will pay for without and I 'm the only candidate who has said this I will not raise taxes on the middle class at all , period .
There is plenty of money . There 's plenty of money in rich people 's pockets .
And it 's time they started paying their share to support this country that has made them successful in the first place .
So I 'm telling you what I will do , how I will go about getting it done and I want you to hold me accountable .
I will be coming back to Staten Island when I am your president .
But I can't do any of this without your help .
Tuesday 's a big , big primary , because we want to send a message that New York wants the kind of future that is going to be positive , that 's going to produce good results for people .
People willing to work hard should be rewarded . We need to have a country again where we believe in the promise of America , where we deliver on the potential of every child .
If you will go out and vote for me on Tuesday , I will fight for you during this campaign and I will fight for you every single day in the White House !
Thank you and God bless you , Staten Island ! Thank you .
Today , today you proved once again there 's no place like home .
You know , in this campaign we 've won in every region of the country , from New York to the South to the East to the West but this one 's personal .
New Yorkers , you 've you 've always had my back .
And I 've always tried to have yours . Today , together , we did it again and I am deeply , deeply grateful .
I want to thank everyone who came out and voted .
And to all of you across New York who 've known me and worked with me for so long : It is humbling that you trust me with the awesome responsibilities that await our next president .
And to all the people who supported Senator Sanders : I believe there is much more that unites us than divides us .
You know , we started this race not far from here on Roosevelt Island , pledging to build on the progressive tradition that 's done so much for America , from Franklin Roosevelt to Barack Obama .
And tonight , a little less than a year later , the race for the Democratic nomination is in the home stretch and victory is in sight .
I want to say to all of my supporters , and all of the voters .
You have carried us every step of the way , with passion and determination that some critics tried to dismiss .
Because of you , this campaign is the only one , Democrat or Republican , to win more than 10 million votes .
I 'm going forward because more voices remain to be heard and tomorrow , it 's on to Connecticut , Delaware , Maryland , Pennsylvania , and Rhode Island .
We need you to be volunteering . I hope you will join the 1.1 million people who 've already contributed at hillaryclinton.comand by the way , most with less than $100 because we have more work to do .
Under the bright lights of New York , we have seen that it 's not enough to diagnose problems .
You have to explain how you have to resolve them .
That 's what we have to do together for our kids , for each other , for our country .
So I want you with me to imagine a tomorrow where no barriers hold you back , and all of our people can share in the promise of America .
Imagine a tomorrow where every parent can find a good job , and every grandparent can enjoy a secure retirement ; where no child grows up in the shadow of discrimination or under the specter of deportation ; where hard work is honored , families are supported , and communities are strong : A tomorrow where we trust and respect each other despite our differences because we 're going to make positive differences in people 's lives .
That is what this is supposed to be about , actually helping people .
Now , we all know we all know many people who are still hurting .
I see it everywhere I go . The Great Recession wiped out jobs , homes , and savings , and a lot of Americans haven't yet recovered .
But I still believe , with all my heart , that as another greater Democratic president once said ,
There 's nothing wrong with America that can't be cured by what 's right with America .
That is , after all , what we 've always done .
It 's who we are . America is a problem-solving nation .
And in this campaign , we are setting bold progressive goals backed up by real plans that will improve lives : Creating more good jobs that provide dignity and pride in a middle-class life ; raising wages and reducing inequality , making sure all our kids get a good education , no matter what ZIP code they live in ; building ladders of opportunity and empowerment , so all of our people can go as far as their hard work and talent will take them .
Let 's revitalize places that have been left out and left behind , from inner cities to coal country to Indian country .
And let 's put Americans to work rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure including our failing water systems like the one in Flint , Michigan .
There are many places across our country where children and families are at risk from the water they drink and the air they breathe .
Let 's combat climate change and make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century .
Let 's take on the challenge of systemic racism , invest in communities of color , and finally pass comprehensive immigration reform .
And , once and for all , let 's guarantee equal pay for women .
And we are going to keep our families safe and our country strong .
and we 're going to defend our rights civil rights , voting rights , workers ' rights , women 's rights , LGBT rights , and rights for people with disabilities .
Those are , after all , New York values and they are American values .
And just as we did in this primary campaign , we need to stand up for them through the general election and every day after that .
You know , it 's becoming clearer that this may be one of the most consequential elections of our lifetimes .
Donald Trump and Ted Cruz are pushing a vision for America
that 's divisive and frankly dangerous : Returning to trickle-down economics , opposing any increase in the minimum wage , restricting a woman 's right to make her own health care decisions , promising to round up millions of immigrants , threatening to ban all Muslims from entering the country , planning to treat American Muslims like criminals .
These things go against everything America stands for . And we have a very different vision : It 's about lifting each other up , not tearing each other down .
So instead of building walls , we 're going to break down barriers .
And in this campaign , I 've seen again our remarkable diversity and determination .
This is a state and a country of big-hearted , open-minded , straigh t-t alking , hard-working people .
Like John , the firefighter from the South Bronx that I met shortly after 9/11 , as he searched for survivors at Ground Zero .
And , like so many others , John got sick breathing the toxic air .
When we met again last week , he gave me a replica of his FDNY badge and thanked me for helping our first responders get the healthcare they need .
We have to keep fighting for John and all of our firefighters , and our police officers , our emergency responders , and the construction workers who did so much .
Or Maxine . Maxine , a 27-year-old single mom from Staten who 's here tonight she shared with me how she worked her way out of poverty , graduated from college , thanks , in part , to the help she got for her child from the Children 's Health Insurance Program .
Or Mikey , from Stuyvesant Town , who spent is Mikey here ?
Well , I 'll tell you , Mikey spent six months in Rikers for a low-level drug offense , and he found out how hard it is for people who 've done their time to find jobs when they get out .
Mikey managed to start his own ice cream shop I took a lot of you , in reality or through the media there yesterday .
I highly recommend it , as you might have seen .
I couldn't stop myself from eating it , as soon as I had it .
By the way , he made a concoction for me called
Victory . But Mikey is one of the many reasons why we have to reform our criminal justice system and ban the box so others have a fair chance of succeeding .
New Yorkers and Americans speak every language , follow every faith , hail from every continent .
Our diversity is one of our greatest strengths in the 21st century , not a weakness .
As Robert Kennedy whose Senate seat I was honored to hold once said , We are a great country , an unselfish country , and a compassionate country .
And no matter what anyone tells you , or what you might hear from others running for president , that is still true today .
America is great , and we can do great things if we do them together .
So please , join us . Text JOIN , 47246 .
Go to hillaryclinton.com . Be part of this campaign . I know how important it is that we get the campaign 's resources from people just like you , who go in and chip in $5 , $25 .
I am grateful to every one of you . And to the volunteers who have worked their hearts out ; to the community leaders , members of the state Senate and assembly , county executives , mayors of cities large and small ; and to the mayor of New York ; our borough presidents ; and our city council members ; and to our governor , our senators ; our congressional members ; and all of my friends across this wonderful state of ours : Thank you .
We 're going to go up against some powerful forces that will do , say , and spend whatever it takes to stop us .
But remember , it 's not whether you get knocked down , it 's whether you get back up .
And finally , finally , let me say this . Finally , let me say this .
There is a remarkable young woman here tonight . Her name is Erica .
Erica Smegielski . She lives the truth of what I 've been saying every day .
Erica 's mother , Dawn , was the principal of Sandy Hook Elementary School .
And she died trying to protect children her students .
Erica was devastated , as any family member is , and she couldn't imagine life without her mom but then she got thinking .
She got back up . She 'd never been involved in politics before , but she has made it her mission to advocate for commonsense gun safety reform .
Like the mothers of Eric Garner , and Trayvon Martin , and so many others , Erica has turned her sorrow into a strategy , and her mourning into a movement .
It isn't easy , but as Erica said the other day ,
What if everyone who faced tough odds said , It 's hard , so I 'm going to walk away ?
' That 's not the type of world I want to live in .
Erica , it 's not the type of world we want to live in , and we refuse to live in that .
So , my friends , that 's the spirit that makes this country great .
It 's how New Yorkers pull together and rebuild our city after the worst terrorist attack in our history .
It 's how Americans worked our way back from the worst economic crisis in our lifetimes , and it is how we 're going to break down all the barriers holding us back .
The motto of this state is Excelsior ever upward .
So let 's go out and win this election ! Thank you .
Thank you so much . I am so happy to be here with all of you and with my friends , elected officials and activists and advocates , some behind me , some around me .
I am grateful to each and every one of you .
And I want to thank Mary for introducing me . But more than that , I want to thank her for being a strong voice on behalf of working women and especially women who have the protection of a union to make sure they are treated right .
And I am always happy to be anywhere with Cecile Richards .
Who has been a fierce , effective fighter for all of us women and men .
Because I will tell you , when the opposition organizes to go after one of us , they 're really going after all of us .
They have gone after unions to undermine the American labor movement .
They have gone after Planned Parenthood and the work that it has done .
And the very basic constitutional right granted to women under Roe v . Wade
to make our own decisions about the most personal health care choices .
And I cannot thank enough my friend , another woman of courage , former Congresswoman Gabby Giffords .
She and her wonderful husband , Mark Kelly , have been on a mission a mission to bring about commonsense gun safety reform .
And together , we 're going to accomplish that mission , Gabby .
And finally , I want to thank and really salute my friend and senator from New York , Kirsten Gillibrand , who has taken on some very difficult issues in the Senate for , again , all of us but particularly for women .
And she 's been on the front lines day after day making change .
She knows you don't get up , you don't make a speech and everything changes .
She knows you 've got to work it every single hour of every single day .
Like me , she is a progressive who likes to get things done
Now , it 's very exciting to be with all of you on the eve of the New York primary .
I am so grateful for the chance I had to represent this state for eight years .
The people of New York took a chance on me in 2000 .
You sent me to the Senate . We worked together .
We dealt with the horrors of 9/11 together . We worked to bring opportunity to inner city areas and upstate rural areas .
And it was the greatest honor of my life to represent you in the Senate .
And I want you to know that New York has my back and I always try to have your back , and I will again if I am so fortunate enough to be elected your president .
I am focused on the issues that really matter to everybody .
To some , an issue or two might be more important than others , but if you look at them all , they are interlocking and intersectional .
They are really about whether or not we 're going to produce positive results in people 's lives .
They are about whether or not we 're going to defend the rights we already have against a concerted assault on every one of them .
They are about whether we will be united as a country or continue to be divided by those who gain from that division .
So let me just spend a few minutes talking about how connected this all is .
I 'm going to talk mostly about women 's issues , but I want you to understand how I see them and how committed I am to making the case that when we take a right from someone , when we erode it , when we make it impossible to exercise , then we hurt everybody not just those who are directly affected .
So think with me for a minute about the kind of America we want to create together .
Imagine a tomorrow where we do have enough good jobs with raised incomes everybody gets a raise , everybody who works hard get rewarded .
How does that happen ? It happens by making sure that the government is playing a role in creating those jobs jobs in infrastructure , advanced manufacturing , clean , renewable energy and small businesses that we 're going to grow and help make more jobs from .
This is not a pipe dream , my friends . This is doable .
We just have to make up our minds what we 're going to have an election about .
It is easy . It is easy to diagnose the problems facing America .
We need solutions That 's why throughout this campaign I have been laying out the plans for how we 're going to do this , what we will achieve together .
Now , I know some people that ( inaudible ) .
I very rarely sleep , but nevertheless I do . Some people have commented , like ,
Oh my gosh , enough with the plans , Hillary .
We don't want to hear any more plans . Just go out and make speeches .
Now , don't talk too loudly , but don't talk too softly .
Well , look , I want you to know that for me , this election is not just about me .
It 's about an agenda that we present to New York tomorrow , that we present to the country , that we vote on because that will give us the chance to actually make the progress we all want to see .
And what I 'm focused on is breaking down the barriers that stand in the way of people getting ahead and staying ahead .
And of course there are economic barriers . That has to be one of our highest priorities creating those jobs , raising those incomes , raising the minimum wage at the national level absolutely has to be at the top of our list .
But you know economic barriers are not the only ones that Americans are facing today .
Take the issue of equal pay for equal work . Now , if it were just an economic barrier we would still not be talking about it .
But it 's more than that . When you actually look and compare why women are still not being paid equally for the work we do , some of it is just not explainable other than good old-fashioned discrimination .
And what you heard Cecile say is absolutely right . There is no women 's discount when we go to check out at the supermarket .
I 've been shopping a long time . And I 've never been looked at by a cashier who said ,
Okay , you 're a white woman , you only have to pay 78 cents .
Or , my friends , you 're a black woman , you 're a Latino woman , you don't have to pay the full price ; you can pay 65 or 55 percent .
That doesn't happen . Look , this is not just a women 's issue .
This is a family issue . If you have a mother , a wife , a sister , a daughter who are working , you have a stake in making sure they are fairly treated .
When you think about how hard it is in our country , the richest country in the world , in fact doing much better economically than anybody else right now , when you think about how hard it is to be able to balance work and family , you have to ask yourself : Why are we doing this to each other ?
Every other advanced economy has figured out how to have family leave paid family leave .
I started working on family leave way back in the 1980s
and I was thrilled when my husband passed a bill that had been vetoed twice by President George H . W . Bush .
Let us not forget this is not ancient Roman history .
It was not that long ago that even the idea of unpaid family leave was considered a bridge too far .
Vetoed twice . So Bill became president . The Congress passed it , sent it to him ; he signed it and 200 million-plus people have taken advantage of it .
So that was a good first step . But too many people couldn't take advantage of it .
They couldn't take off time that they weren't paid for .
That new baby ? That sick spouse ? That ailing mother or grandparent ?
They couldn't take time off . And it is time for us and Kirsten has been a leader on this it is time for us finally to pass paid family leave , and I ( inaudible ) .
This is something that is moving forward in the states .
I want to applaud New York , applaud California ( inaudible ) .
And as your president , we are going to deliver on paid family leave for families in America .
We also have to really focus on education . Again , that 's an issue for everybody .
That 's why I want early childhood education for everybody .
And [ first lady of New York City Chirlane McCray ] is here .
I want to thank her and Mayor de Blasio for making sure that New York City has universal pre-kindergarten .
This is an issue about whether or not we honor and nurture the potential of everyone .
I think that 's what America should be about . Every single person deserves the chance to live up to his or her God-given potential .
And learning starts in those first five years . And then once we get to elementary and secondary school , I intend to be a good partner with America 's teachers to support our educators , to make sure we give them ( inaudible ) .
And let 's spend more time trying to encourage young people , particularly young girls , to go into the STEM courses science , technology , ( inaudible ) .
There are so many opportunities that are not being taken advantage of .
And yet again , just 30-plus years ago , we had a very high percentage of women graduating from college with degrees in computer sciences .
What happened ? Well , some of what happened is the way women were treated in the workforce when they got into technology .
Right now we know , looking at salaries and promotion opportunities , it 's not equal .
So while we encourage more young women to pursue these careers , we 're going to work to get more transparency and more of a commitment from companies to treat women and men equally as they hire , as they promote .
We 're going to make college affordable for everybody in a way that will actually work to send middle class and working and poor ( inaudible ) .
There is absolutely a student debt problem that ( inaudible ) .
We want more national service so that young people can perform national service and actually get a free ride or a totally discounted ride or get their debts forgiven like ( inaudible ) .
And we will continue to improve the Affordable Care Act .
I will defend it . It is working . We 've got to ( inaudible ) improve it , get the costs down .
But again , this is something that is hardly ever talked about .
It was not that long ago when clinical trials about how to treat diseases , including breast cancer , were only done on men .
I know a lot of young people must be shocked to hear that .
I was shocked when I first heard it . And so we had to change a lot .
And now we have the Affordable Care Act , and one of the great changes was to absolutely guarantee that women would no longer pay more for our health insurance than men .
All of these we 've got members of Congress here who have been waging these battles .
My great friend , Congresswoman Carolyn Maloney , has been on the front lines .
Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee has been a loyal ( inaudible ) .
I know it 's hard to believe there was ever a time like this .
We just don't ever want to go back . That 's why it 's so important to think about how far we 've come to protect the gains we have made .
And we still have disparities in health care treatment between men and women , but also particularly on the basis of income and access .
And we 're going to tackle all of that , and we 're going to get the cost of prescription drugs down .
And let 's finally make a commitment to treating mental health problems like the health care issue ( inaudible ) .
We have to do more . Let 's do more to treat addiction .
Let 's do more to save lives . There 's really exciting work ahead of us .
And practically everything I 've said is opposed by the Republicans .
They don't think we need to raise the minimum wage .
Donald Trump says wages are too high in America right now .
They don't believe equal pay is a problem . They sure don't want to move toward paid family leave .
So this is not just a free choice . There are consequences for how we vote and the objective we put forward .
And the other point about what 's happening with the Republicans , as I mentioned earlier , is they truly want to strip us of the right to our ( inaudible ) .
And I 'll tell where I stand because it is in opposition to Bernie 's .
I will defend a woman 's right to make her own health care decisions .
I will defend Planned Parenthood . I was honored to receive the Planned Parenthood Action Fund and the ( inaudible ) endorsements because I have been , as Cecile said , on the front lines on behalf of women 's rights for a long time .
And when Trump said what he said about punishing women , I was appalled .
That is a core issue . And when my opponent in this primary said it was a distraction , to talk about the real issues , I was appalled again .
There 's nothing more important than defending our human rights and ( inaudible ) .
And maybe if some of his people will either think it 's a distraction or who want to reverse it went to some of the places I 've been over the last 25 years and seen how that is used to suppress women 's rights and their autonomy , and where the government makes decisions , that consequences are horrible , whether it 's Chinese government policy in the past for one child and forced abortions and sterilizations , or the policies of the Communist regime in Romania with forced childbearing , we cannot , we must not , ever let governments and politicians make those decisions .
And as long as I 'm around , we never will .
I will also defend marriage equality and work to end discrimination ( inaudible ) .
We are going to work and pass the Equality Act in Congress this ( inaudible ) .
I will defend voting rights and work to reverse and end Citizens United .
I will defend the right to organize and bargain and the right of unions to represent people ( inaudible ) .
The American labor movement helped to build the American middle class , and those who have forgotten it conveniently are undermining what it takes to make sure people are represented .
I stopped at a carwash in Queens on my way here because the car washers have been unionized , and for the first time they 're getting a decent salary .
They 're getting ( inaudible ) . The most important thing we can do is to give everyone the dignity and the purpose that a job brings , a job where they have the opportunity to continue to improve their standard of living , to provide a good middle class lifestyle for themselves and their children .
Now , we 're also going to fight for comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship .
I have said I will start this work immediately upon becoming president , and I will .
I am so proud of New York . Lady Liberty stands in our harbor .
We are a city of immigrants , a city of immigrants and a nation of ( inaudible ) .
And yes , we are going to fight together to take on the gun lobby for common-sense gun safety ( inaudible ) .
This is an issue that knows no boundaries . I have met too many people , fathers and mothers , siblings , children , close friends and loved ones , who have lost people .
On average , 90 people a day are killed by guns in America .
That is 33,000 people a year . And there are many powerful lobbies in Washington .
As I said in the debate the other night in Brooklyn , I said , look .
Senator Sanders talks a lot about the greed and recklessness of Wall Street , and I agree with that , and I 've got the toughest plans .
And they know I mean it because they 're actually trying to beat me , running ads ( inaudible ) .
These guys are good at making their assessments , and they know I 'm trouble for them .
( Inaudible . ) But what about the greed and recklessness of the gun manufacturers ?
I couldn't believe that Senator Sanders said the parents of the Sandy Hook children did not deserve their day in court .
Partly because he voted for the bill that gave special protections , immunity from liability , to the gun makers and sellers .
I was in the Senate at the same time . So was Barack Obama .
I voted against it . Barack Obama voted against it .
Bernie Sanders voted for it . This has to be a voting issue .
We have to organize ourselves to take on this powerful lobby .
They know I 'm coming after them . They 're they 're already coming after me , and I consider that a badge of honor .
I will stand ( inaudible ) . So my friends , we have work to do .
I see the folks from Take a Stand . We 're going to protect Social Security and confirm ( inaudible ) .
I can't do any of that work without you . And really , when I think about the tests the next president faces , the first one is , can you produce positive results ?
And that 's why I 'm telling you what I will do and how it will change your lives .
The second is , can you protect us ? And you know there is nothing more important right here in New York .
And I think what you are hearing from Trump and Cruz is not only offensive , it 's dangerous .
When Donald Trump says no Muslims can come to America , a nation founded on religious liberty , in case he hadn't been taught that , that doesn't only offend us .
That sends a message to the rest of the world .
If we 're going to defeat , as I intend to do , terrorism , and ISIS in particular , we need a coalition of nations to stand with us ( inaudible ) .
I know how hard it is to create a coalition because I did create the coalition that imposed sanctions on Iran , including China and Russia , to force them to the negotiating table .
So I know that this is hard . And it doesn't help to have somebody running for president insulting the religion of a number of the nations we need to have in the coalition to help defeat ISIS ( inaudible ) .
And when we 've got Ted Cruz , Ted Cruz , saying let 's have special police patrols profiling on religion American Muslims , I mean , it 's beyond absurd .
And that 's what the chief of the NYPD said .
He said , Well , what am I going to do with the 1,000 NYPD officers who are American Muslims ?
And Commissioner Bill Bratton summed it up by saying , Ted Cruz doesn't know what the hell he 's talking about .
So yes , we have to protect ourselves and we have to lead the world in accordance with our values .
And finally , we have to unify our country because there is just too much demagoguery and hate-filled speech going on .
And it is just so impossible to imagine people running for president would be saying what they 're saying , inciting violence between and among Americans .
I will go anywhere , any time , to meet with anybody to find common ground .
We will find that common ground . We will find those ( inaudible ) .
But I will also stand my ground on your behalf , protecting our rights , making sure we 're moving forward together .
There 's a lot that is special for me about this primary tomorrow because I did run here and because you were all so supportive .
But there 's something else that I want to end with .
The first state ever recorded in human history that set forth a rationale for women to have rights happened in Seneca Falls , New York .
Susan B . Anthony ( inaudible ) separates governments , who joined forces with the women who were claiming that they too should have a right to vote , that they too should have the right to serve on juries , to be fully citizens .
That Declaration of Sentiments you can Google it later , and I 'm sure you will kicked off the suffrage movement .
And again , it didn't come easily . There were protests , demonstrations .
Eventually women chained themselves to the fence around the White House , going to prison , going on hunger strikes , to claim the right to vote .
And yes , eventually that was granted . We will celebrate the 100th anniversary in 2020 .
When I think about the sacrifices of the suffragettes , when I think about the sacrifices of the leaders of the civil rights movement , when I think about the sacrifices of those who were trying to form unions against extraordinary violent protest , when I think what all these Americans did starting in the 19th and going into the 20th century to make a very simple claim on the idea that we are all created equal , we all have a right to life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness , we all have a stake in America , that ( inaudible ) is what this election is about .
Please , come out ! Vote tomorrow ( inaudible) ! Wow .
Thank you , Pennsylvania ! What a night . I want to thank everyone I want to thank everyone .
Thank you all so much . Wow . I just want to thank all of you , everyone who came out to vote here in Pennsylvania , and across Maryland , and Delaware , Connecticut , Rhode Island .
I am so grateful to all our volunteers , our organizers , our community leaders .
Everyone who worked their hearts out . And I want to thank the leaders here in Pennsylvania .
Thank you , Governor Wolf . Thank you , Senator Casey .
Thank you , Congressman Cartwright . And thank you so much , Mayor Kenney , for your great help .
And of course , I want to thank the 42nd president of the United States , my husband .
Now , with your help , we 're going to come back to Philadelphia for the Democratic National Convention with the most votes and the most pledged delegates .
And we will unify our party to win this election , and build an America where we can all rise together an America where we lift each other up instead of tearing each other down .
So we need you to keep volunteering . Keep talking to your friends and neighbors .
Please join the more than 1.1 million people who 've already contributed at hillaryclinton.com .
I know there are still too many barriers holding too many Americans back .
But , despite what other candidates say , we believe in the goodness of our people and the greatness of our nation .
And if anyone doubts that , just let them travel across this country , as I 've done in this campaign the past year , hearing people 's stories , learning about their struggles .
Listen to the quiet determination of the working parents I met last week in Jenkintown , Pennsylvania .
They are doing everything they can to provide opportunities to their children in an economy where there still aren't enough good-paying jobs .
Listen to the mothers who lost children to gun violence and encounters with the police .
They 're turning their sorrow into strategy , and their mourning into a movement a movement for justice and dignity .
Listen to the nurse I met this weekend in New Haven , Connecticut , who worked for years to build a middle-class life and raise a family .
But then , her luck changed . She was diagnosed with breast cancer and used up all her savings and her sick time .
Soon , she was facing foreclosure and the prospect of losing the home she 'd loved for more than 20 years .
And here 's what she said to me : My daughter and I live in fear of the day that we might come home and have a lock on the door .
We 're in pain . We 're hurting . We were , and are , the backbone of this country the middle class .
We 're not asking for a handout . We just want to be treated fairly .
And she is speaking for so many people across our country who feel beaten down , left out , and left behind .
People who have worked hard and done their part , but just can't seem to get ahead and find it tough even to get by .
Now , underneath all those worries together , we are going to come together , and we are going to solve the problems we face .
And I am aware that too many people feel at the mercy of forces too big for anyone to control , and they just worry that those of us in politics put our own interests ahead of the national interest .
The faith that we can make things better , that we can give our kids a better future than we had , is at the heart of who we are as a nation .
And it 's one of many reasons that being American has always been such a blessing .
And our campaign is about restoring people 's confidence in our ability to solve problems together by delivering results that help people follow their own dreams .
That 's why we 're setting bold , progressive goals backed up by real plans that will improve lives .
After all , that is how progress gets made . We have to be both dreamers and doers .
And as a great Democratic president once said , There is nothing wrong with America that can't be cured by what 's right with America .
I believe we can create more good jobs with rising incomes jobs that provide dignity , pride , and a middle-class life .
We can renew our democracy by overturning Citizens United . We can lift up people and places who 've been left out from our inner cities to Appalachia , in every manufacturing town hollowed out when the factory closed , every community scarred by substance abuse , every home where a child goes to bed hungry .
That 's what we Democrats believe in . That 's what we know is possible .
So we will build on a strong progressive tradition from Franklin Roosevelt to Barack Obama .
And I applaud Senator Sanders and his millions of supporters for challenging us to get unaccountable money out of our politics , and giving greater emphasis to closing the gap of inequality .
And I know , together , we will get that done .
Because whether you support Senator Sanders or you support me , there 's much more that unites us than divides us .
We all agree that wages are too low and inequality is too high .
That Wall Street can never again be allowed to threaten Main Street .
And we should expand Social Security , not cut or privatize it .
We Democrats agree that college should be affordable to all , and student debt shouldn't hold anyone back .
We Democrats agree that every single American should and must have quality , affordable health care .
We agree that our next president must keep our country safe , keep our troops out of another costly ground war in the Middle East .
And we Democrats agree that climate change is an urgent threat .
And it requires an aggressive response that can make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century .
And we Democrats agree on defending all of our rights civil rights and voting rights , workers ' rights and women 's rights , LGBT rights and rights for people with disabilities .
So in this election , we will have to stand together and work hard to prevail against candidates on the other side who would threaten all those rights and pit Americans against each other .
They would make it harder to vote , not easier .
They would deny women the right to make our own reproductive health care decisions .
They would round up millions of hardworking immigrants and deport them .
They would demonize and discriminate against hardworking , terror-hating Muslim Americans who we need in the fight against radicalization .
And both of the top candidates in the Republican Party deny climate change even exits .
Now , the other day , Mr. Trump accused me of playing the , quote , woman card .
Well , if fighting for women 's health care and paid family leave and equal pay is playing the woman card , then deal me in .
So , my friends , if you are a Democrat , an Independent , or a thoughtful Republican , you know their approach is not going to build an America where we increase opportunity or decrease inequality .
So instead of letting them take us backwards , we want America to be in the future business .
That 's why I want you to keep imagining a tomorrow where instead of building walls , we are breaking down barriers we are making it more likely that Americans will be part of a prosperous , inclusive , decent society .
We 're imagining a tomorrow where every parent can find a good job and every grandparent can enjoy a secure retirement .
We 're imagining a tomorrow where no child grows up in the shadow of discrimination or under the specter of deportation .
And where every child has a good teacher and a good school , no matter what ZIP code that child lives in .
And imagine a tomorrow where any young person can graduate from college debt-free .
Or imagine a tomorrow where hard work is honored , families are supported , streets are safe and communities are strong , and where love trumps hate .
That is the future I want . I want that future for my granddaughter and for all of our children and grandchildren .
Now , think of this : Our nation was born right here in Philadelphia .
Our Declaration of Independence and Constitution were signed just a few blocks away .
And ever since even through dark and difficult chapters of our history the idea of America has shone through .
At our best , we are , as Robert Kennedy said , a great country , an unselfish country and a compassionate country .
But America 's greatness is not a birthright . It must be earned by every generation .
So please join us . Join us . Go to hillaryclinton.com .
Text JOIN , 4-7-2-4-6 . Volunteer , contribute . Let 's go forward .
Let 's win the nomination , and in July let 's return as a unified party .
Thank you all so much . Participants included Erica Smegielski , the daughter of Dawn Hochsprung , the principal of Sandy Hook Elementary School , who was killed in the shooting in Newtown ; Kim Washington , an educator at Hamden High School , who lost multiple students to gun violence , and founded the New Haven chapter of Moms Demand Action ; Nelba Marquez-Greene , whose six-year-old daughter , Ana Grace , was killed in the Sandy Hook shooting ; Deborah Davis , who lost her 20-year-old son , Phillip , to gun violence in 2010 when he was shot by a friend ; and Iran Nazario , who lost his brother to gun violence and founded Compass Peace Builders , which helps at-risk youth avoid becoming perpetrators or victims of gun violence .
Thank you . Wow . I am really honored to be here back in Hartford .
I am so grateful to each of these panelists , and so many in the audience , who like me are determined that we will do whatever we can to save lives in America .
On average , 90 people a day die from gun violence .
That is 33,000 people a year . A year . If anything else were killing 33,000 Americans a year , you can bet we would be fully mobilized , doing everything we possible could to save lives .
I 'm really proud that your leaders here in Connecticut have shown the way .
And I want to thank Governor Dan Malloy , who is here ; Lieutenant Governor Nancy Wyman , who is here ; your young mayor , who is a friend of my daughter'swhich , of course , makes that even better for me with his daughter , who is here .
Thank you , Mayor Bronin , and thank you to everyone .
I want to also call out Reverend Henry Brown for his leadership as well .
I know how hard it was to do what Connecticut 's governor and legislature did after Sandy Hook .
So I am not here to make promises I can't keep .
I am here to tell you I will use every single minute of every day , if I am so fortunate enough to be your president , looking for ways that we can save lives that we can change the gun culture .
It is just too easy for people to reach for a gun to settle their problems .
It makes no sense . And we can do this consistent with the Second Amendment .
We can do this with the support of responsible gun owners .
And that is exactly what we will do . And I want you to know that I know I don't have all the answers .
You will hear from the panelists today both about their personal experiences , and about what they are doing to organize in their communities and across the nation to come up with commonsense gun safety reforms .
I 'm advocating for comprehensive background checks , closing every one of the loopholes : the gun show loophole , the online loophole , what 's called the Charleston loophole .
Under the gun laws , you are entitled to get the gun you want to buy after three days whether or not the background check is completed .
The reason it 's called the Charleston loophole is that the young killer of Charleston went to get that gun , came back three days later , the background check wasn't completed , but under the law the seller had no choice but to sell the gun .
Twenty-four hours later they learned he never should have been able to buy the gun , because of his record .
But he took that gun , and he went to that venerable church in Charleston during Bible study , and he was invited in and ended up murdering nine people .
I was in Philadelphia yesterday . There were 12 shootings in Philadelphia just over the weekend four deaths .
A police officer , shot and injured . And a four-year-old girl , killed when her father was playing with his loaded gun .
Because in that 33,000 deaths every year , there are homicides , to be sure , and there are suicides , and there are tragic , avoidable accidents , too many of them including children who find that loaded gun .
So it is with incredible gratitude to the people you 're about to hear from that I ask you to please join us in this effort .
I 'm raising it everywhere I go , because we need a national movement .
They gun lobby is the most powerful lobby in Washington .
You can talk about Wall Street , drug companies , insurance companies , big they 're all powerful , don't get me wrong .
Nobody is more powerful than the gun lobby , because they have figured out how to intimidate elected officials at all levels , who basically just stop thinking about this problem , because they 're too scared to stand up to the NRA .
That 's why what happened here in Connecticut really needs to be a model to stand up , and then fight for what you have done politically , and convince a majority of people to stand with you .
That 's what we have to do in Washington and nationally .
We have to turn this into a voting issue . So we 're now going to hear from the panelists , and I 've asked each of them to talk about their personal story but , also , to share their ideas about what could be done .
We have a really good , diverse panel . And then , if we have time when we finish , I would love to hear from people in the audience , too .
Thank you so much . Thank you . Thank you , Senator Bob Casey .
Wow , it is so great to be back in northeastern Pennsylvania , to be here in Dunmore .
I stopped in Scranton on my way here . I always feel so much at home .
I stopped at Casa Bella restaurant . But I was running late , so my plan to actually eat dinner was kind of abbreviated .
But I said hello to a lot of people there , and I met people who said things to me like ,
I knew your cousins , I knew your uncles .
I had one man say , Didn't we sled down Court Street one winter ? I said , Could have been , could have been I was there . Met another woman who lived next door to my grandparents on Diamond Avenue , and it just brings back a flood of the best memories and the best people , and I can't tell you how happy and proud
I am to be back here with all of you .
I want to thank not only the senator , I want to thank the congressman .
Thank you so much , Matt Cartwright . I want to thank the mayors the mayor of Dunmore , the mayor of Scranton , who are here ; the Democratic county chair and the Democratic chair of the city of Scranton .
I want to thank Sandy ( ph ) and everybody who has helped to make this evening just such a happy occasion .
I 've got my two brothers here . They love coming back , and , of course , they go every summer to Lake Winola to the cottage that my grandfather built .
So this place has a lot of not just memories but special meaning to me .
And the thing I want you to know more than anything else is I will work my heart out for the people in northeastern Pennsylvania .
I will be a good partner , because we have work to do .
We have work to do to make sure we have enough good jobs with rising incomes for people willing to work to get ahead and stay ahead .
And we 're going to we 're going to look for those new jobs in infrastructure jobs : our roads , our bridges , our ports , our airports , our rail system all need work .
And I agree with Congressman Cartwright : We need passenger rail service from northeastern Pennsylvania .
So when I think about infrastructure , I think about good jobs jobs that can't be exported , jobs that put people in this area to work , that pay a good wage so that people can get ahead .
And we 're going to also look to see what we can do in advanced manufacturing , because I believe we can still make it in America , and we 're going to find ways to do that .
And we need more clean , renewable energy jobs that will put people to work right here .
And we need to help small businesses . Small businesses create most of the jobs .
And we 're not creating enough small businesses . We 've got too many obstacles in the way .
My idea about economic growth and development is : Let 's knock down the barriers the barriers that stand in the way of people being able to start businesses that will employ more people .
And we 're going to work hard to raise the national minimum wage because you have 150,000 Pennsylvanians working for $7.25 an hour .
You 've got thousands more working on what 's called the tipped wage .
Okay , some of you know about it , but a lot of you don't .
It 's kind of a secret , but here 's how it works
: If you 're in certain jobs like waitressing , bartending , hair salons , those kind of jobs you can be paid as little in our country as $2.13 an hour , because , the idea is , you 're going to make a lot of money from tips .
I 'll tell you what , that is just a disgrace .
So if people are working full-time , they should not still be in poverty at the end of the year .
And two-thirds of all minimum wage workers are women , and many of them are single moms taking care of their kids .
So I am going to fight to raise the minimum wage at the national level , and I 'm also going to do everything I can to guarantee equal pay for women 's work .
And you know why ? I 'll tell you : This is not just a women 's issue .
If you have a mother , a wife , a sister or a daughter who are working and they are not being paid what they should be paid compared to others , then you 're getting shortchanged your family is , the economy is .
I did an event this morning in Philadelphia with a woman named Lilly Ledbetter .
Some of you know that she worked as a supervisor in a factory in Alabama for 40 years .
She had a supervisor job ; she was the only woman with a supervisor job .
And she did not know for years that she made 40 percent less than the men doing the same job .
And as she rightly said , she and her husband were working hard , and when she and I were talking she said , You know , when you go to the store , you don't get a women 's discount because you don't get paid the same .
And now she 's retired , her Social Security won't be the same , because she was not paid the same .
Her 401(k ) will not be the same . So this has a lot of implications for everybody and it 's time we said , Look , in America , if you do the job , you get the equal pay men and women alike .
And we have to do more to raise everybody 's pay , because nobody is getting a raise .
And we 've got to make sure that we go where the money is when it comes to funding things like passenger rail .
They money 's at the top . I am the only candidate running in either party who has pledged I will not raise middle-class taxes , because the middle class needs a raise , not a tax increase .
That 's why I 've laid out all these plans about how we 're going to create jobs , how we 're going to end the loopholes , get rid of the deductions that give people at the top a chance to go a lot further than anybody else .
And it is a fact that the economy does better when we have a Democrat in the White House .
Because everything I 've just said , the leading Republicans don't agree with .
Donald Trump actually says he actually says wages are too high in America .
I mean , honestly , I don't know who he talks to .
He ought to get out of those towers and actually come down and talk with people and listen to them .
My husband was here a week or so ago , and it wasn't ancient history .
Some of us can remember , we had eight years with 23 million new jobs .
And during those eight years , incomes went up for everybody not just people at the top : middle-class families , working families , poor families .
There were enough jobs , and the incomes were going up , so the median family income went up 17 percent in those eight years .
Now , it won't surprise you to hear me say I think there are some lessons we can learn from that .
And there 's another lesson we can learn : Why didn't it continue ?
Well , because we got a Republican president , and they went back to trickle-down economics .
And pay close attention to what Trump and Cruz are saying .
They want to go back to trickle-down economics on steroids .
We 've been down that road ; it did not work .
We had a Republican president who slashed taxes for the wealthy .
I was voting against it in the Senate , speaking out against it in the Senate .
They took their eye off the financial markets and the mortgage markets and we had the Great Recession , and a lot of people haven't even recovered from that .
So , for heaven 's sakes , why would we go back to the failed policies that dropped us into the ditch that the Republicans dug for our country ?
And I know how hard it was . We were losing 800,000 jobs a month when President Obama was elected .
Nine million Americans lost their jobs multiply that by family members .
Five million homes lost multiply that by family members .
$13 trillion in family wealth wiped out . I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for digging us out of that ditch and putting us back on solid ground .
So we are back creating jobs , we are back with a lower unemployment rate but we don't yet have the kind of energy that 's producing the results that I want to see for the American people .
That 's why we 've got to build on what has been done .
Don't get talked into some sort of a detour . I love it , the Republicans and I did listen to them during the last year
, that'sI did it so you didn't have to . And you know they all say things like ,
Well , it 's the slowest recovery in history .
That takes a lot of nerve . We wouldn't have needed a recovery if they hadn't wrecked the economy in the first place .
So I got to tell you , I don't know who they 're going to end up nominating , but I 'm looking forward if I 'm fortunate enough to be the nominee to actually having a debate about economics , a debate about more good jobs , a debate about rising incomes .
I 'm also looking forward to debating about education , and what we need to do to invest in education .
Every child in this country deserves a good teacher , in a good school regardless of the ZIP code that child lives in .
And we need to do more for early childhood education , so more kids are prepared when they actually get to school to learn .
And I want to be a good partner with our teachers and educators , and I appreciate them being here with their blue t-shirts on .
Thank you . And we 're going to make college affordable .
And I 've laid out a plan about how we 're going to do it , how it will work and I know that we can actually make it happen , because it is something that now is stopping a lot of young people from starting college and completing college .
And see , my plan has debt-free tuition but it also says to colleges , public colleges and universities : You 've got to get your costs under control , you 've got to take a hard look at what you are charging young people and their families .
And my opponent 's plan relies on Republican governors to pay a third of the cost .
Somehow , I don't think a lot of these Republican governors are going to do that .
So I don't want to make promises I can't keep .
I 've put forth a plan that I can deliver debt-free tuition on .
And then we 've got to tackle the debt that young people already have .
How many people here have student debt ? How many have ever had student debt ?
I meet young people with tens of thousands of dollars of student debt and really high interest rates , right ?
And I 've got to tell you , it makes no sense .
I took out loans when I went to college and law school , but I didn't have a 10 , 12 , 14 percent interest rate and I meet young people across this country who do .
So we are going to let you refinance your student debt .
If you can refinance a mortgage or a car payment , you sure ought to be able to refinance your student debt .
And if you pay your student debt payments every month , we 're going to have a cutoff time .
After 20 years , you 're done because it should not keep going for the rest of your lives .
We 're also going to work to make sure that health care is affordable and that you have choices .
I 'm going to defend the Affordable Care Act , because it took so long for us to get to this point .
Before there was something called Obamacare , there was something called Hillarycare .
And we worked really , really hard . But I 'll just be honest with you : I got beat by the insurance companies and the drug companies .
They just knocked me down . I love it when some people running for this office talk about how they 're going to take on the special interests .
I 've done it , and I know you 've got to be prepared
, you 've got to be ready , and you 've got to do everything you can to beat them back .
So when we weren't successful , I got up off the floor and I said ,
Okay , what can I do now ? And I worked with Republicans and Democrats to create the Children 's Health Insurance Program , which insures 8 million kids .
And I know how much that meant to those families , and I meet young people who come up and thank me because they didn't have reliable health care before that program .
That 's why I was so happy when we passed the Affordable Care Act , because when you 've been to as many places as I have in our country , and met so many people who did not have health insurance they made too much money to qualify for Medicaid , they didn't work for people who offered insurance , they couldn't afford the individual insurance that 's why 20 million people have signed up so far .
But we 've got to get the costs down : the copays , and the deductibles , and the prescription drug costs .
And I have a very clear idea about how we 're going to do that .
Now , the Republicans want to repeal it . They never tell you what they 'll replace it with because they know we won't like it , because it 's just going to go back to the way it was .
If you have a preexisting condition , you 're out of luck .
If you 're a woman , your costs are going to be more than a man 's .
If you 're a young person , you may not have that opportunity to stay on your family 's policy until you 're 26 .
Lifetime limits will come back . So a lot of what we 've changed to actually give people a chance to get the insurance to take care of themselves would be wiped out .
And my opponent wants to start all over again . And I can tell you , we do not need another big , contentious debate about health care .
We need to make what we 've got work really well , and improve it , and get the costs out of an upwards spiral .
Now , I want to mention two other things , because you don't hear presidential candidates talk about these two things , and I am really determined we 're going to address both .
Number one : We need more treatment for mental health problems .
I was talking to Congressman Cartwright before I came out , and we were talking about running for office and I said ,
You know , there is something that is so personal .
I meet people maybe I just meet them for a minute , sometimes I talk to them for 30 minutes but people want to tell you what 's on their minds , because they 're hoping that you or somebody can help .
And the two things I hear the most about yes , of course , economics , knocking down those barriers but mental health and addiction .
And so when I shake a hand of a mother , or father , or a sister , or brother , or child , and they say ,
Please do something about mental health , I know it 's personal .
Maybe it affects them . Maybe it affects somebody they know or they are related to .
And I cannot tell you how many of those conversations have led to somebody saying , Please do something about the heroin and opioid epidemic .
I had a young man come up and introduce himself and say he was going to vote for me .
I said , Well , do you mind if I ask why ?
He goes , Yeah , he said , I 'll tell you .
I played football in high school . I got really hurt my senior year .
I had to have surgery . When I got out of the surgery , I was in terrible pain , and the doctor prescribed opioids .
He said , I 'm not embarrassed to tell you I got hooked , and I couldn't shake it .
But I couldn't keep getting the prescription filled , so I turned to heroin , he said .
He said , I am so fortunate to be standing here , because about a year ago , I lost a really good friend who overdosed .
We were in a car , we were doing heroin ; he died .
He said , That just said to me I can't keep doing this , and so I went to get help .
But , he said , It took me two months to get help .
Because when you 're ready to get help , there 's not enough places to go to get help .
And we are losing thousands and thousands of Americans of all age , but particularly young Americans under 40 , and we have got to address this .
So I will do everything I can within our health care system to remove the stigma on mental health and to tackle the heroin and opioid epidemic .
Now , there 's a lot of other important issues and concerns that we have to address in this campaign .
We 've got to make sure that we have more affordable housing for people , particularly in our cities .
We 've got to make sure that we have more of a diversified economy in our rural areas .
We 've got to make sure we revitalize our cities , like Scranton and other places , to be magnets to attract more business .
We 've got to make sure that we protect the safety net that exists .
So I will never let the Republicans privatize Social Security or Medicare .
And I will never let them privatize the VA . We have to improve it and provide the services our veterans deserve to have .
But we 're not going to let the Koch brothers and the Republicans dismantle the VA .
We also have to be committed to do more to try to find ways where we are talking with confidence and optimism about the future , and I think that means we have to protect people 's rights .
We have to protect a woman 's right to make her own health care decisions .
We have to defend marriage equality , and end discrimination against the LGBT community .
We have to defend voting rights and end Citizens United , which is corrupting our political system .
We have to be focused on protecting workers ' rights and the right to organize and bargain in a union .
Now , why is that ? Because the American labor movement helped to create the American middle class .
I was meeting with some carpenters , and steamfitters , and electricians in Pittsburgh earlier today , and they were telling me about the kind of pressure that they 're under by forces in the Republican party and others who are their allies to really erode the right to bargain .
And I will tell you this : You do not have to be a member of a union to want there to be unions doing that , because that raises the base for everybody .
And I 'll tell you something else I will take on : I will take on the fight for commonsense gun safety measures .
And I want to be really clear about this because I learned how to shoot a gun behind our cottage in Lake Winola , and I know how important gun ownership , and particularly hunting , is here in northeastern Pennsylvania .
And I want you to know that we can't ignore the Second Amendment and we can't ignore that 33,000 people a year die from gun violence .
And I think we are smart enough to figure out how to do that .
And the gun lobby doesn't want us to figure out how to do that .
They just want to keep everybody all upset and agitated .
Well , at some point , they have to answer for that .
Responsible gun owners actually support what I am proposing : comprehensive background checks ; closing the gun show loophole ; closing the online loophole ; closing what 's called the Charleston loophole ; ending the special protection that Congress voted for and gave to gun makers and sellers , which means that they don't ever have to change it 's the only industry in our country given that .
So there 's a lot that could be done to make guns less accessible to kids .
Of those 33 , 000 , way too many are kids finding loaded guns , playing with guns , being able to pull that trigger .
I mean , safety locks and other kinds of technology would save a lot of children 's lives without infringing on one 's Second Amendment rights .
So I 'm well aware that I 'm walking into the buzz saw here .
I understand that . But I can tell you that when you have met as many victims of gun violence now as I have because I have been visiting with people who have lost their loved ones for 25 years now you either become totally insensitive , because it is too painful , or you say to yourself ,
Hey , come on , we 're better than this .
I was in Philadelphia the day before yesterday with mothers who have lost their children .
I was in Hartford , Connecticut yesterday on a panel with a mother from Hartford whose bright , really promising 20-year-old son was caught in some kind of crazy gang crossfire , just minding his own business .
I was there with the daughter of the principal of Sandy Hook Elementary School who went , when she heard the gunshots , to see what she could do to stop it , and was murdered .
And I was there with the mother of one of the little girls who was murdered at Sandy Hook .
And when you meet those people , as I have , when you hear their stories , can you imagine sending off your six- or seven-year-old to go to school , maybe with a little backpack and then getting a call that a man who was clearly disturbed , and should never have had access to military assault weapons , had walked in there and murdered 20 children and six adults ?
And there are lots of stories like that . And we have to make this a voting issue , and responsible gun owners have to stand up and say ,
This has nothing to do with my guns , my hunting , my sport shooting , my collecting .
So I want to do this , and I also want to make a pledge to you that I will do everything in my power to keep America safe , to defeat terrorists and anybody else who threatens our country or Americans anywhere .
And here 's another area where Trump and Cruz are not just saying things that are offensive which they they 're saying things which are dangerous , and I want you to understand this : I went to 112 countries on your behalf as secretary of state .
And I know we 're not going to be able to defeat ISIS unless we have a coalition that includes Muslim-majority nations .
That 's how we 're going to do it . And when you have someone running for president who basically says we don't want any Muslims in our country , that sends a message .
And it sends a message which makes the job of building that coalition a lot harder .
And when you have Ted Cruz saying , Hey , we need special police patrols in neighborhoods where Muslims live , how that would ever work nobody can explain , but nevertheless that 's what he said ; and the NYPD , which I worked with closely after 9/11 , because I was a senator from New York on 9/11 they were just shaking their heads hearing what Cruz was saying .
And the chief of the department said , Well , that 's an idea that doesn't go anywhere : What will we do with the 1,000 Muslim American police officers that we have on the NYPD ?
And the commissioner , Bill Bratton , who has as much experience in this area as anybody , said , Ted Cruz doesn't know what the hell he 's talking about .
So look , I know some of these lines get big applause responses in these rallies that Trump has , but stop and think :
Is that smart ? Does that work ? Does it help us ?
Does it protect us ? And the answer to all of that is ,
No . And then he went even further and basically said he didn't care if more countries got nuclear weapons .
I mean , we have been working Republicans and Democrats alike ; it 's something that Bob Casey works on to prevent more countries from getting nuclear weapons and having a free-for-all that brought more nuclear weapons into the world .
So I 'm telling you , I 'm looking forward to debating them on the economy , and I 'm looking forward to debating them on national security because we 're electing a Commander-in-chief as well as a president .
So let me just close by saying this . I think one of the jobs of the next president has to take on is unifying our country .
We 've got too much division . It 's fine to have a back-and-forth in a political campaign .
That goes with the territory . But when the politics are over , when the campaigns are done , when the elections have been held , we 've got to work together .
Diagnosing the problem is not enough . We need solutions that are going to bring people to the table and actually roll up our sleeves .
And I want you to know this about me : In every job I 've ever had , I have worked hard to find common ground .
I did it as first lady . I did it as a Senator .
I did it as secretary of state working across the aisle , finding ways to solve problems .
And I 'll tell you something else : A lot of Republicans have nice things to say about me when I 'm actually working on a job , and I will probably be publicizing all those nice things as we go forward .
Now , when I 'm actually running for a job , oh , my gosh , they 're after me from sunup to way past sundown .
I get that . And they call me names and all the rest of it .
I don't mind . Because what 's really important is that I do what I tell you I will do , that I want you to hold me accountable for what I will do , that we will work together across every line that divides us , that we will create a future that our children and our grandchildren can have the same opportunities that should be the birthright of any American .
I am so grateful that I was born in this country .
I am so grateful that I had parents who understood hard work .
I am so grateful that I have a chance to try to do the same for my grandchild .
And I want to be the champion for all of America but particularly for our children and our grandchildren .
They deserve no less . Let 's go out and please vote on Tuesday in the primary .
Thank you all so much . Well thank you so much , Rosa .
And , really , everything that you were kindly saying about me I would just return multiple times over to you .
You have been such a strong , tenacious fighter for the people you represent , and for the values that we both share about the kind of country we want : For everyone to fulfill his or her own potential , to have a chance to get ahead and stay ahead .
That 's what it 's all about . And , like you , I fear that we are losing that dream .
And there are many reasons for that . There 's a lot of crosscurrents at work .
But we have to figure out what to do about it .
We can't just watch it , and complain about it , and pray about and worry about we 've got to figure out what to do about it , and we need more good jobs with rising incomes .
And we need to make sure that our education system works for every child , no matter what zip code that child lives in .
We 've got to make college affordable . We 've got to make everything possible we can to help people who have student debt pay it down , like you can refinance a mortgage or a car payment .
We have to continue the work on the Affordable Care Act to make sure that it is really providing high-quality care at an affordable price .
We have to pay attention to caregiving , because a lot of the families that I know that I meet with , I hear from are juggling all those family responsibilities .
So I think it is way past time that we have a raise in the nationwide minimum wage and , where it can be , raised higher , like we 've just seen in New York and California , and what the Fight for Fifteen stands for .
We must do that , and support communities that are willing to really try to put a better , higher floor under low-wage workers .
We need paid family leave , because it 's the most important part of anyone 's life .
Caring for yourself , if you 're ill ; your parents ; your spouse ; your parents ; your grandparents ; whatever those responsibilities might be .
I remember very well Rosa 's indomitable mothers campaigning with me in 1992 .
My mother lived with us for the last ten years of her life .
Creating more support for people predominantly , but not exclusively women who do care-giving , is high on my list .
Equal pay , we shouldn't be talking about it in 2016 , it 's almost embarrassing .
I was in Philadelphia , outside of Philadelphia yesterday with Lily Ledbetter who Rosa knows well , as do I who worked in a job for years not knowing , although she was doing exactly the same as her male counterparts , she was begin paid 40 percent less .
And she made a point yesterday that isn't made often enough , Rosa , in this discussion .
Because she was paid 40 percent less , her 401k is less , her social security is less , her family was really short-changed .
The equal pay issue is not a women 's issue , it 's a family issue , it 's a fairness issue , it 's , frankly , an economic issue .
We have to get incomes raised and we need to give more people a chance to get out into the economy and make the choices they think are best for them and their families .
We also have work to do to create more good jobs .
I think our real emphasis has to be on infrastructure jobs our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our ports , our airports , our water systems ; what we can't see as well as what we do see .
We have great work to be done . These are jobs that cannot be exported .
And these are good , union jobs in most instances .
And they are good middle class jobs . We also need to do more to bring back advance manufacturing , and there are lots of ways of doing that .
Because right now we have 1.2 million jobs that are waiting to be filled by people with advance skills in the trades : welders , machinists , tool and dye makers , and the like .
We 've got to get a better fit between people 's interests , their job prospects , and the jobs that we need done in our society .
And we should be doing more to combat climate change by emphasizing clean , renewable energy jobs .
And some nation is going to be the 21st century clean energy super power .
It 's either going to be China , Germany , or us it should be us .
And that will bring just a flood of new jobs and everything from energy efficiency , to wind and social power , to so much else .
We also need to do more to support small businesses , like the one we 're in right now .
We were for the longest time the leader for small business creation in our county , and now we aren't anymore .
We 've got too much red-tape and too much problems with getting access to credit and being able to start and continue and grow jobs .
Particularly true for minority- and women-owned small businesses . And since most new jobs will come from small businesses , we have a big stake in helping to generate a revival in small businesses .
These are some of the things that I am very focused on , and I want to hear from all of you .
Because I want your ideas both from your own lives , from your own work , your own perspective .
I do have a great affection for New Haven , having spent four years here ; three years at the law school , one at the Yale Child Studies Center , and working at the Yale-New Haven Hospital .
Really being one of the first and I wasn't even a lawyer yet , I was a law student making rounds with doctors to deal with something we had just really come to grips with : child abuse .
And it 's hard to imagine , but this was a revelation to people that children coming in injured , burned , otherwise damaged , had gotten that way because of deliberate , physical punishment as opposed to an accident or some other way that wouldn't cause the concerns , even though the child would have to be cared for .
So I loved living here , and I 'm also very impressed with all the changes I 've seen over the years as I 've come back for events .
Mayor , I want to be a good partner to you , and the people of this city , and the surrounding areas , to keep doing what we have to do to create more opportunity and to lift up folks .
Affordable housing huge problem . Transportation to jobs if we get jobs another big problem .
So we need to really put our heads together on how we 're going to be able to deliver on a lot of what we know would create greater opportunity for working people in our country and right here in New Haven .
So , Rosa , with that , I know we 've got some people here .
And do you want to start , Mr. Williams ? Wow .
I am so happy to be here with all of you .
Thank you so much . I want to thank Helen Magana , who just was up here introducing Senator Reed .
She is the valedictorian there at the high school , and I am so pleased that she could be here with us .
I want to thank your fabulous congressional delegation . I had the great honor and privilege of working with them :
Senator Jack Reed , and Senator Sheldon Whitehouse , and Congressman David Cicilline , and Congressman Jim Langevin .
And I think you know you 've got a great quartet in Washington representing this state .
And I look forward , if I 'm so fortunate enough to be your president , to working closely with them to really do everything we can for Rhode Island .
I want to thank your governor , Governor Gina Raimondo , who 's here .
And I know that your governor is going to need a president who is going to work with you to bring jobs and raise incomes , just like ( inaudible ) .
And I want to thank Mayor James Diossa from right here [ in Central Falls ] .
I 'll tell you what , it 's great to see a young mayor with that kind of enthusiasm and commitment .
And I want to also thank Nellie Gorbea , the secretary of state .
And the Rhode Island Democratic chair , who I know is here somewhere , Joe McNamara .
Where 's Joe ? Hey , Joe ! Thank you .
Okay , everybody , I got to tell you , I am so happy to be back in Rhode Island .
I love this little state . I have so many friends here .
I know how resilient and hardworking the people in this state are .
And I 'm here to tell you what I want to do as your president to make sure that everybody in Rhode Island has the chance to get ahead and stay ahead because we will have more good jobs with rising incomes that will lift up people .
And I know we can do it . Now , how do I know we can do it ?
Because it wasn't so long ago that we did it .
And I know that my Republican opponents get upset when I say this , but it does happen to be true : The economy does better when we have a Democrat in the White House .
And I kind of like what happened in the 1990s .
It wasn't that long ago , but we had 23 million new jobs and incomes went up for everybody , not just people at the top : middle-class families , working families , poor people .
More people were lifted out of poverty in those eight years than at any comparable time in decades .
And then people say , Well , what happened ?
We were on the right track . The median family income went up 17 percent .
Some of us remember that . The median African American income went up 33 percent .
Well , I 'll tell you what happened : A Republican President happened .
And I know , because I was in the Senate arguing against voting against the return of trickle-down economics .
Look what happened . They cut taxes on the wealthy .
They took their eyes off of the financial markets and the mortgage markets .
And we ended up in the worst financial crisis that had faced this country since the Great Depression .
And Rhode Island was especially hard-hit , wasn't it ? In 2008 , when Barack Obama was elected , right after that election he called me , asked me to come to see him in Chicago .
I didn't know why . It turned out he wanted me to be secretary of state .
But before we got to that before we got to that , he just looked at me and he said , It is so much worse than they told us .
And it was . We were losing 800,000 jobs a month .
Nine million Americans lost their jobs . Five million homes were lost .
$13 trillion in family wealth was wiped out . Now , why am I saying this ?
So we don't forget that there is a direct connection between the failed economic policies of the Republicans and what happened to so many middle-income Americans .
Because they 're coming they 're coming back with the same snake oil .
That 's what Trump and Cruz are peddling . I think that 's the right reaction .
And I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for digging us out of the ditch that the Republicans put our country into .
So we are standing , but we 're not yet running the way we need to .
And here 's what I want to do : I want to get us back into the job creation business .
I want us to make many more investments in infrastructure our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our ports , our airports , our water systems .
Those are jobs that can't be exported . They have to be done right here and they have to be done by people like the laborers and ( inaudible ) and others of the trades .
I have no doubt in my mind that if we don't make those kinds of investments in infrastructure , we 're not going to make as many jobs and create as much economic growth as we 're capable of making .
I also want us to invest in advanced manufacturing . I still believe we can make it in America , and we can compete because we have the best workers of anywhere in the world .
And then we 're going to combat climate change by creating clean , renewable energy jobs .
And I want to see us go back to doing what works to build the American middle class , and that includes supporting the American labor movement to organize and bargain collectively .
We cannot revive the American middle class unless we do revive the American labor movement , because you are not going to get the kind of fair wages and benefits that workers deserve if they don't have power at the negotiating table .
I plan to use the bully pulpit of the White House and the Department of Labor to enforce the labor laws we already have on the books .
We 're going to end wage theft , which is a problem across America .
We 're going to go after overtime problems where people are not being paid fairly for the work they do .
We are going to go after raising the national minimum wage so people who work full-time are not going to be left in poverty at the end of the year .
And we are finally going to get equal pay for women .
Now Let me tell you that this is not just a women 's issue .
If you 've got a mother , a wife , a sister , a daughter who are working , it 's a family issue .
It 's an economic issue . And there is no women 's discount when we go to pay , checking out at the supermarket , is there ?
I mean , I I 've shopped for a lot of years .
And when I go check out , I don't have the cashier say ,
Oh , you 're a white woman . You only have to pay what is it now 78 cents on the dollar .
Or , You 're an African American woman , you only have to pay 65 , 66 cents , or ,
You 're a Latino woman , you only have to pay 55 , 58 cents .
That has never happened to me . And it is time we recognize this is a question of fundamental fairness , and here is another element to it that I want you to think about .
I was with Lilly Ledbetter yesterday . And some of you know who she is .
The Lilly Ledbetter Pay Act is named for her , and here 's why .
She went to work in a factory in Alabama 40-plus years ago .
And she was promoted . She became a supervisor the only woman among all the supervisors .
She did not know for all those years she was paid 40 percent less for doing exactly the same job .
Her family was cheated . And you know what else that means ?
That means that when she retired her Social Security payments were less than they should have been because she was never paid what everybody else was paid .
So this is the kind of issue that we talk about raising incomes .
This could raise incomes immediately . Raising the minimum wage , guaranteed equal pay that will help so many families that are struggling right now .
So I have put forth a jobs program . It 's easy to diagnose the problems , but you 've got to come up with solutions for problems .
It is not enough to say what 's wrong . We can see that , but we 've got to come together to fix what 's wrong .
And we 're going to do more to help small businesses , because that 's where most of the new jobs will come from , and particularly minority and women-owned small businesses that are growing ( inaudible ) .
And , I 've got to tell you , I am excited by what we can do .
I know it 's hard work , and I know everything I 've just told you the Republicans don't agree with .
Donald Trump actually says wages are too high in American .
Honestly , I don't know who he spends his time talking to , but I recommend he get out of one of those towers and actually go down and talk to some folks and ( inaudible ) .
And we know there 's a connection between the jobs we can get and the ladders of opportunity we can build by knocking down the barriers that stand in the way and education .
So here 's what I believe : I believe we 've got to , number one , have early childhood education , to get more kids prepared to be successful when they 're going to school .
Number two , we have to support our teachers and our educators who are working ( inaudible ) .
Number three , we need to get more technical education back into our schools , our high schools , and our community colleges .
We need more apprenticeship programs like the ones the unions run so that more people can have a chance to acquire the skills .
We have 1.2 million jobs right now in America today that pay 50- , 60- , 70,000 a year for tool and die makers , and welders , and machinists skilled tradespeople .
We need to convince more young people to go into those jobs if that 's exactly what they want to do and the kind of life they want , and we need more training programs .
That 's why I want to incentivize more apprenticeships . And we are going to make college affordable for everybody .
Under my plan you can go to a public college or university debt free .
Now , I have a difference with my esteemed opponent , who wants free college to everybody but , I have to tell you , I don't want free college for people who can pay for it like Donald Trump .
I think we have to focus on where the need is , and to meet our middle-class families and working families and poor families .
So we 're going to put the money where it 's most needed so that every young person who wants to go to college will be able to afford ( inaudible ) .
And then , because they will be debt free they will come out debt free , so now we 've got to deal with the problem of everybody who has debt already .
We have 40 million Americans with student debt . Here 's what I want to do : I want you to be able to refinance your student debt , just like a mortgage or a car payment .
So we 're going to get that debt down and off of the backs of young people .
We 're going to put a time certain when it 's over , and we 're going to stop the government from making money lending money to young people to go to college ( inaudible ) .
I will also defend the Affordable Care Act , because before there was something called Obamacare there was something called Hillarycare .
And some of you remember my husband and I tried really hard to get a system for affordable care .
And the drug companies and the insurance companies beat us .
That 's just as plain as I can say it .
I do have some experience in dealing with special interest and powerful forces ( inaudible ) .
So when they weren't successful on that , I said ,
Okay , what are we going to do now ?
And that 's when we went to work to create the Children 's Health Insurance Program , which insures 8 million kids .
So that 's why I was so happy when the Affordable Care Act passed because I know it is literally saving people 's lives .
There is not a week that goes by that somebody doesn't tell me what a difference it has made in their lives .
The Republicans want to repeal it . I will never let that happen .
I want to get the costs down copays , and deductibles , and prescription drug costs down .
And I want to deal with two other problems mental health and addiction .
When you travel , as I have now for more than a year , there are a couple of things that come up everywhere in the country that people talk to you about .
People talk to you about the economy , getting wages up .
People talk to you about student debt . And people talk to you about mental health and addiction .
We have got to do more to help people deal with mental health issues , and make sure insurance companies provide payment for those services .
And we have got to have more programs for treatment and recovery in addiction , particularly with opioids and heroin .
Now , I want you to listen closely to the Republicans , because they are telling you what they want to do in our country .
And Trump keeps saying things like , Well , I didn't really mean it was all part of my reality TV show ; running for president , we 'll be on your screen .
Well , you know what ? If we buy that , shame on us .
Because he 's already showed us what he believes and he 's already said what he wants to do , and he wants to go after every one of the rights we have .
So I want to tell you where I stand . I will defend a woman 's right to make her own health care decisions .
I will defend Planned Parenthood against all of these attacks .
I was honored to be endorsed by the Planned Parenthood Action Fund , and they [ endorsed ] because I 've been on the front lines of this battle for a really long time .
I will defend I will defend marriage equality and work to end discrimination .
We can't let laws like those passed in North Carolina and Mississippi stand .
I will defend voting rights . And on the first day of my campaign I 've said I will do whatever I can to reverse and end Citizens United .
I will defend workers ' rights . I will defend Social Security against privatization and work to increase the Social Security Trust Fund .
I will defend Medicare , and I will defend the Veterans Administration from the schemes that the Republicans are promoting .
We have to make it work , but we can't let it be privatized .
I will keep working for comprehensive immigration reform And I will continue to take on the gun lobby and fight for commonsense gun ( inaudible ) .
There is no doubt in my mind that we can do this consistent with the Second Amendment of the Constitution .
Comprehensive background checks , close the gun show loophole , close the online loophole , close what 's called the Charleston loophole , and end the special protections Congress voted for to give gun manufacturers and sellers special immunity from accountability .
If you have , as I have , met a lot of family members who have lost loved one to gun violence , it 's no longer a statistic .
We lose on average 90 people a day , 33,000 people a year .
If something else were killing 33,000 Americans we would be organized and focused and working to try to save lives .
Well , we are going to save lives by moving towards gun reform that will help us do that .
So when you think about who you vote for on Tuesday , the first test is : Can this person produce results jobs , education , health care , protecting our rights ?
And the second is : Can this person be Commander-in-chief and protect America and ( inaudible ) .
And I have to really thank your senator , Jack Reed , who understands as much about national security as anybody in Congress and probably nearly anywhere else .
I was deeply honored that he endorsed me , that he has said what means the world to me that I will keep America safe , because I will spend every minute of every day making sure that we do just that .
There 's a lot of work to do . I 'll just make two quick points here , because , again , there 's a really big difference between where I am and where the Republicans are .
Foreign policy and national security can't be an afterthought , something you 'll get to sometime , because you never know what 's going to happen .
It can be on the very first day of your administration , and it can be something that nobody had predicted .
But here 's what I want you to understand about Trump and Cruz , because it 's a really significant difference : What they say about the world is not only it 's dangerous .
And , in particular , when Donald Trump says bar all Muslims from coming to our country , that sends a message around the world .
We have to put together a coalition to defeat ISIS , and in that coalition we need Muslim-majority nations .
And I know something about putting together coalitions , because I put together the coalition that imposed sanctions on Iran , and included China , and Russia and brought Iran to the negotiating table .
So when I think about putting together that coalition , I know it becomes harder if somebody running for president is insulting the religion of some of the nations that we need in the coalition .
He also basically said it 's fine for countries more countries to have nuclear weapons , and fine if we pull out of NATO .
Loose cannons tend to misfire , and what we have with him is the loosest of all cannons .
And then Ted Cruz talked about special police patrols patrolling neighborhoods where America 's Muslims live .
Now , how we would ever do that I don't think adds up , but the best response to that comes from the NYPD , and I 've worked closely with them after 9/11 because I was a senator on that terrible day , and they know as much about keeping us safe and dealing with the threats that we have to face as anybody in our country , because , unfortunately , they 've had to .
And so when Cruz said that , the chief of the department said ,
Well , I don't know how we would do that .
We have a thousand American Muslims in the NYPD .
And Bill Bratton , the commissioner of police , sort of summed it up by saying , Ted Cruz doesn't know what the hell he 's talking about .
Now , and finally , the third test : After we talk about who can get results who has the track record , who has the experience , who 's actually produced positive changes in people 's lives , who can keep us safe the third is who can unify our country .
Well , that is , I hope , the right answer .
Thank you for that . But I want to say just a couple of things about this , because Sheldon Whitehouse , your senator , wrote a wonderful book about American values .
And if you look at where we are in history , no country no country has been as successful in governing ourselves , in making it possible for people to pursue their own dreams .
But you can't take that for granted . We have work to do .
We 've got to start listening to each other , respecting each other , let 's even say being kind to each other again .
We are going to have disagreements . That comes with the territory of being Americans .
We have different political views . That 's fine . But we also have to solve our problems .
So I want you to know this : As first lady , and senator , and secretary of state , I worked with lots of Republicans .
Republicans with whom I didn't have a whole lot in common but it was the right thing to do to try to solve your problems .
And I will go anywhere , anytime , to meet with anybody to find common ground , and I will also stand my ground so that we get to a point where we make progress together .
Your members of Congress and ( inaudible ) senators , both David and Jim , they 're hardworking .
They really try to make a difference . Well , we need everybody to feel like we can do that again , because at the end of the day we can't create the opportunity I want to see for every single American to live up to your own potential , and particularly our children , if we don'tif we don't have the kind of vision and strategy and effort that 's going to lead us in the direction of the future that I want for our country .
And so that is why I tell people , Here 's what I want to do , and I want you to hold me accountable .
I am not making promises I can't keep . I am not making statements that drive us further apart .
Every time I do an interview , the interviewer says ,
Well , here 's what Donald Trump called you today .
Would you like to respond ? I say ,
No , I don't want to respond . I will respond to what he says about everybody else immigrants , women , Muslims , John McCain , everybody else he 's insulted I will respond on their behalf .
But I 'm interested in what we can do together , not increasing his exposure on television .
So here 's what I 'm asking you . Tuesday is a big day .
Five states are voting , and I need your help on Tuesday .
I need you to go to the polls and bring everybody you can ( inaudible ) .
And I promise you this : If you will go vote for me on Tuesday , I will stand up and fight for you through this campaign , all the way into the White House , for every day that I am honored to serve .
Thank you , Rhode Island . God bless you . Hillary outlined four key elements of the plan : cutting red tape for small businesses and entrepreneurs , expanding access to capital , simplifying taxes and implementing tax relief for small businesses , and expanding access to new markets .
Specifically , Hillary focused today on providing relief to community banks that are being squeezed by regulations that don't make sense for their size and mission and doing it without harming consumers .
She also criticized Republican proposals that would roll back critical protections for Americans against the excesses of Wall Street 's biggest banks .
Well , first , let me thank all of you , in particular our roundtable participants , for being with us today , and thanks to Bike Tech for welcoming us to this amazing facility .
I 'm delighted to have this chance to talk more about small businesses .
But I want to begin with what 's happening more broadly with America 's economy and America 's families .
Because I 've always believed fundamentally that when our families are strong , our country is strong .
And we 've come back from very tough economic times .
I don't need to tell anybody here that . Our economy and our country are in much better shape today , and in large measure because families worked so hard .
They took extra jobs , they skipped vacations , they scrimped , they postponed going to college , they saved , and made it work .
But the deck is still stacked for those at the top .
People aren't getting a fair shake . Something is wrong when CEOs earn more than 300 times what the typical American worker earns , and when hedge fund managers pay a lower tax rate than truck drivers or nurses .
I 'm running for President because everyday Americans and their families need a champion , and I want to be that champion .
I want families to do more than just get by I want you to get ahead and stay ahead .
I want to make the words middle class mean something again .
Now , small businesses like Bike Tech and the ones you 'll hear about today have to be at the heart of that effort creating jobs , driving growth , and giving millions of Americans the chance to live up to their God-given potential .
Now , I did not learn this from politics I learned it from my father who was a small-business man .
He had a very small business , printing drapery fabrics , and then went out and sold them .
My mother , my brothers , and I , and occasionally a few day laborers would help out with the actual printing process .
That 's what put food on the table and gave us a solid middle-class home .
Today , small businesses all over our country have worked their way back from the perfect storm of the crisis , when sales and credit , together , dried up at the same time .
Businesses are finally starting to sort out how they can grow again , add jobs , and plan for the future .
But the deck is stacked here as well . Ask any small business owner , as I have , and they 'll tell you : It is wrong that it is so easy for big corporations to get a break but so hard for small businesses even to get a loan .
It shouldn't take longer to start a business in America than it does in Canada and France !
But that is the fact . I want to be a small-business president .
A president who does make it easier to start and run a small business in this country , so it seems less like a gamble and more like an opportunity .
We have to level the playing field for our small businesses .
First , we need to cut the unnecessary red tape that costs small businesses time and money and keeps new entrepreneurs out .
We should scrub federal regulations to find responsible ways to make life easier for small businesses , and we should offer new incentives to state and local governments to do the same , because that 's where many of the obstacles still lie .
Second , we need to simplify tax filing and provide targeted credits and deductions for small businesses , not just the big corporations that can afford the lawyers and lobbyists to find every single loophole .
Third , we 'll use technology to expand access for small businesses into new markets , whether it 's across town , across the state , or across the world .
That 's what I did in partnership with eBay in Upstate New York when I was a senator .
We started a public-private partnership to help small businesses that had never sold beyond their local community reach customers very far away .
Fourth , and I want to emphasize this today , I will fight to level the playing field for small businesses so they can get the financing they need to build and hire including women and minority entrepreneurs who face extra barriers .
And this morning , when I was reading the Des Moines Register big headline : REPORT : Iowa Ranks Last for Women-Owned Business .
This could not be a more timely article for our discussion today , and although it says Iowa has made some progress , it says Iowa has seen the lowest growth in the most businesses owned by women from 1997 to 2015 , and women-owned companies have the least economic clout in Iowa and all the states and the District of Columbia .
So this is a very important issue for our whole country , but I think it is especially important for our friends here in Iowa because access to credit can be as important to growing a small business as it is for the big ones .
And you shouldn't have to be a Fortune 500 company to get a loan .
For many small businesses these loans have always come from community banks with deep local ties .
But today those same local banks are being squeezed by regulations that don't make sense for their size and mission , like endless examinations and paperwork designed for banks that measure their assets in the many billions .
And when it gets harder for small banks to do their jobs , it gets harder for small businesses to get their loans .
We can ease these burdens for community banks without harming consumers and without easing up one bit on Wall Street .
We should not apply the same restrictions on community banks as those needed by the big banks .
Let 's be clear about this : It 's not the big banks that need relief from it 's small banks and small businesses .
We should be doing more to rein in risky behavior on Wall Street and Too Big to Fail
banks , not less . I fully support the regulations in Dodd-Frank on the big banks , but we should pass commonsense community banking reform right now .
However , the Republicans in the Congress insist on using this issue to give relief to community banks as a Trojan Horse for rolling back the protections for consumers and rolling back the rules for the big banks as we 're seeing right now in what Republicans are introducing .
We should call it what it is : a cynical attempt to game the system for those at the top .
Our goal should be helping community banks serve their neighbors and customers the way they always have .
To make it easier to give our responsible loans to responsible small businesses so they can do what they do best : create jobs and help families get ahead .
So I 'm eager to hear the ideas from everyone around the table .
And I see some elected officials in the audience and am eager to hear your ideas .
What are the obstacles you 've faced , and how can you overcome them ?
What more can we do to help small businesses grow ?
a strong contrast with Republican candidates who are stuck in the past , trying to return to the same failed Cold War-era isolationism that has only strengthened the Castro regime .
Thank you . Thank you very much . Thank you .
I want to thank Dr. Frank Mora , director of the Kimberly Latin American and Caribbean Center and a professor here at FIU , and before that served with distinction at the Department of Defense .
I want to recognize former Congressman Joe Garcia . Thank you Joe for being here a long time friend and an exemplary educator .
The President of Miami-Dade College , Eduardo Padrn and the President of FIU , Mark Rosenberg I thank you all for being here .
And for me it 's a delight to be here at Florida International University .
You can feel the energy here . It 's a place where people of all backgrounds and walks of life work hard , do their part , and get ahead .
That 's the promise of America that has drawn generations of immigrants to our shores , and it 's a reality right here at FIU .
Today , as Frank said , I want to talk with you about a subject that has stirred passionate debate in this city and beyond for decades , but is now entering a crucial new phase .
America 's approach to Cuba is at a crossroads , and the upcoming presidential election will determine whether we chart a new path forward or turn back to the old ways of the past .
We must decide between engagement and embargo , between embracing fresh thinking and returning to Cold War deadlock .
And the choices we make will have lasting consequences not just for more than 11 million Cubans , but also for American leadership across our hemisphere and around the world .
I know that for many in this room and throughout the Cuban American community , this debate is not an intellectual exercise it is deeply personal .
I teared up as Frank was talking about his mother not able to mourn with her family , say goodbye to her brother .
I 'm so privileged to have a sister-in-law who is Cuban American , who came to this country , like so many others as a child and has charted her way with a spirit of determination and success .
I think about all those who were sent as children to live with strangers during the Peter Pan airlift , for families who arrived here during the Mariel boatlift with only the clothes on their backs , for sons and daughters who could not bury their parents back home , for all who have suffered and waited and longed for change to come to the land , where palm trees grow .
And , yes , for a rising generation eager to build a new and better future .
Many of you have your own stories and memories that shape your feelings about the way forward .
Like Miriam Leiva , one of the founders of the Ladies in White , who is with us today brave Cuban women who have defied the Castro regime and demanded dignity and reform .
We are honored to have her here today and I 'd like to ask her , please raise your hand .
Thank you . I wish every Cuban back in Cuba could spend a day walking around Miami and see what you have built here , how you have turned this city into a dynamic global city .
How you have succeeded as entrepreneurs and civic leaders . It would not take them long to start demanding similar opportunities and achieving similar success back in Cuba .
I understand the skepticism in this community about any policy of engagement toward Cuba .
As many of you know , I 've been skeptical too .
But you 've been promised progress for fifty years . And we can't wait any longer for a failed policy to bear fruit .
We have to seize this moment . We have to now support change on an island where it is desperately needed .
I did not come to this position lightly . I well remember what happened to previous attempts at engagement .
In the 1990s , Castro responded to quiet diplomacy by shooting down the unarmed Brothers to the Rescue plane out of the sky .
And with their deaths in mind , I supported the Helms-Burton Act to tighten the embargo .
Twenty years later , the regime 's human rights abuses continue : imprisoning dissidents , cracking down on free expression and the Internet , beating and harassing the courageous Ladies in White , refusing a credible investigation into the death of Oswaldo Paya .
Anyone who thinks we can trust this regime hasn't learned the lessons of history .
But as secretary of state , it became clear to me that our policy of isolating Cuba was strengthening the Castros ' grip on power rather than weakening it and harming our broader efforts to restore American leadership across the hemisphere .
The Castros were able to blame all of the island 's woes on the U.S. embargo , distracting from the regime 's failures and delaying their day of reckoning with the Cuban people .
We were unintentionally helping the regime keep Cuba a closed and controlled society rather than working to open it up to positive outside influences the way we did so effectively with the old Soviet bloc and elsewhere .
So in 2009 , we tried something new . The Obama administration made it easier for Cuban Americans to visit and send money to family on the island .
No one expected miracles , but it was a first step toward exposing the Cuban people to new ideas , values , and perspectives .
I remember seeing a CNN report that summer about a Cuban father living and working in the United States who hadn't seen his baby boy back home for a year-and-a-half because of travel restrictions .
Our reforms made it possible for that father and son finally to reunite .
It was just one story , just one family , but it felt like the start of something important .
In 2011 , we further loosened restrictions on cash remittances sent back to Cuba and we opened the way for more Americans clergy , students and teachers , community leaders to visit and engage directly with the Cuban people .
They brought with them new hope and support for struggling families , aspiring entrepreneurs , and brave civil society activists .
Small businesses started opening . Cell phones proliferated . Slowly , Cubans were getting a taste of a different future .
I then became convinced that building stronger ties between Cubans and Americans could be the best way to promote political and economic change on the island .
So by the end of my term as Secretary , I recommended to the President that we end the failed embargo and double down on a strategy of engagement that would strip the Castro regime of its excuses and force it to grapple with the demands and aspirations of the Cuban people .
Instead of keeping change out , as it has for decades , the regime would have to figure out how to adapt to a rapidly transforming society .
What 's more , it would open exciting new business opportunities for American companies , farmers , and entrepreneurs especially for the Cuban-American community .
That 's my definition of a win-win . Now I know some critics of this approach point to other countries that remain authoritarian despite decades of diplomatic and economic engagement .
And yes it 's true that political change will not come quickly or easily to Cuba .
But look around the world at many of the countries that have made the transition from autocracy to democracy from Eastern Europe to East Asia to Latin America .
Engagement is not a silver bullet , but again and again we see that it is more likely to hasten change , not hold it back .
The future for Cuba is not foreordained . But there is good reason to believe that once it gets going , this dynamic will be especially powerful on an island just 90 miles from the largest economy in the world .
Just 90 miles away from one and a half million Cuban Americans whose success provides a compelling advertisement for the benefits of democracy and an open society .
So I have supported President Obama and Secretary Kerry as they 've advanced this strategy .
They 've taken historic steps forward re-establishing diplomatic relations , reopening our embassy in Havana , expanding opportunities further for travel and commerce , calling on Congress to finally drop the embargo .
That last step about the embargo is crucial , because without dropping it , this progress could falter .
We have arrived at a decisive moment . The Cuban people have waited long enough for progress to come .
Even many Republicans on Capitol Hill are starting to recognize the urgency of moving forward .
It 's time for their leaders to either get on board or get out of the way .
The Cuba embargo needs to go , once and for all .
We should replace it with a smarter approach that empowers Cuban businesses , Cuban civil society , and the Cuban American community to spur progress and keep pressure on the regime .
Today I am calling on Speaker Boehner and Senator McConnell to step up and answer the pleas of the Cuban people .
By large majorities , they want a closer relationship with America .
They want to buy our goods , read our books , surf our web , and learn from our people .
They want to bring their country into the 21st century .
That is the road toward democracy and dignity and we should walk it together .
We can't go back to a failed policy that limits Cuban Americans ' ability to travel and support family and friends .
We can't block American businesses that could help free enterprise take root in Cuban soil or stop American religious groups and academics and activists from establishing contacts and partnerships on the ground .
If we go backward , no one will benefit more than the hardliners in Havana .
In fact , there may be no stronger argument for engagement than the fact that Cuba 's hardliners are so opposed to it .
They don't want strong connections with the United States . They don't want Cuban Americans traveling to the island .
They don't want American students and clergy and NGO activists interacting with the Cuban people .
That is the last thing they want . So that 's precisely why we need to do it .
Unfortunately , most of the Republican candidates for President would play right into the hard-liners ' hands .
They would reverse the progress we have made and cut the Cuban people off from direct contact with the Cuban American community and the free-market capitalism and democracy that you embody .
That would be a strategic error for the United States and a tragedy for the millions of Cubans who yearn for closer ties .
They have it backwards : Engagement is not a gift to the it 's a threat to the Castros .
An American embassy in Havana isn't a it 's a beacon .
Lifting the embargo doesn't set back the advance of freedom it advances freedom where it is most desperately needed .
Fundamentally , most Republican candidates still view Cuba and Latin America more broadly through an outdated Cold War lens .
Instead of opportunities to be seized , they see only threats to be feared .
They refuse to learn the lessons of the past or pay attention to what 's worked and what hasn't .
For them , ideology trumps evidence . And so they remain incapable of moving us forward .
As President , I would increase American influence in Cuba , rather than reduce it .
I would work with Congress to lift the embargo and I would also pursue additional steps .
First , we should help more Americans go to Cuba .
If Congress won't act to do this , I would use executive authority to make it easier for more Americans to visit the island to support private business and engage with the Cuban people .
Second , I would use our new presence and connections to more effectively support human rights and civil society in Cuba .
I believe that as our influence expands among the Cuban people , our diplomacy can help carve out political space on the island in a way we never could before .
We will follow the lead of Pope Francis , who will carry a powerful message of empowerment when he visits Cuba in September .
I would direct U.S. diplomats to make it a priority to build relationships with more Cubans , especially those starting businesses and pushing boundaries .
Advocates for women 's rights and workers ' rights . Environmental activists .
Artists . Bloggers . The more relationships we build , the better .
We should be under no illusions that the regime will end its repressive ways any time soon , as its continued use of shor t-t erm detentions demonstrates .
So we have to redouble our efforts to stand up for the rights of reformers and political prisoners , including maintaining sanctions on specific human-rights violators .
We should maintain restrictions on the flow of arms to the regime and work to restrict access to the tools of repression while expanding access to tools of dissent and free expression .
We should make it clear , as I did as secretary of state , that the freedom to connect is a basic human right , and therefore do more to extend that freedom to more and more Cubans particularly young people .
Third , and this is directly related , we should focus on expanding communications and commercial links to and among the Cuban people .
Just five percent of Cubans have access to the open Internet today .
We want more American companies pursuing joint ventures to build networks that will open the free flow of information and empower everyday Cubans to make their voices heard .
We want Cubans to have access to more phones , more computers , more satellite televisions .
We want more American airplanes and ferries and cargo ships arriving every day .
I 'm told that Airbnb is already getting started . Companies like Google and Twitter are exploring opportunities as well .
It will be essential that American and international companies entering the Cuban market act responsibly , hold themselves to high standards , use their influence to push for reforms .
I would convene and connect U.S. business leaders from many fields to advance this strategy , and I will look to the Cuban American community to continue leading the way .
No one is better positioned to bring expertise , resources , and vision to this effort and no one understands better how transformative this can be .
We will also keep pressing for a just settlement on expropriated property .
And we will let Raul explain to his people why he wants to prevent American investment in bicycle repair shops , in restaurants , in barbershops , and Internet cafes .
Let him try to put up barriers to American technology and innovation that his people crave .
Finally , we need to use our leadership across the Americas to mobilize more support for Cubans and their aspirations .
Just as the United States needed a new approach to Cuba , the region does as well .
Latin American countries and leaders have run out of excuses for not standing up for the fundamental freedoms of the Cuban people .
No more brushing things under the rug . No more apologizing .
It is time for them to step up . Not insignificantly , new regional cooperation on Cuba will also open other opportunities for the United States across Latin America .
For years , our unpopular policy towards Cuba held back our influence and leadership .
Frankly , it was an albatross around our necks . We were isolated in our opposition to opening up the island .
Summit meetings were consumed by the same old debates . Regional spoilers like Venezuela took advantage of the disagreements to advance their own agendas and undermine the United States .
Now we have the chance for a fresh start in the Americas .
Strategically , this is a big deal . Too often , we look east , we look west , but we don't look south .
And no region in the world is more important to our long-term prosperity and security than Latin America .
And no region in the world is better positioned to emerge as a new force for global peace and progress .
Many Republicans seem to think of Latin America still as a land of crime and coups rather than a place where free markets and free people are thriving .
They 've got it wrong . Latin America is now home to vibrant democracies , expanding middle classes , abundant energy supplies , and a combined GDP of more than $4 trillion .
Our economies , communities , and even our families are deeply entwined .
And I see our increasing interdependence as a comparative advantage to be embraced .
The United States needs to build on what I call the power of proximity .
It 's not just it 's common values , common culture , common heritage .
It 's shared interests that could power a new era of partnership and prosperity .
Closer ties across Latin America will help our economy at home and strengthen our hand around the world , especially in the Asia-Pacific .
There is enormous potential for cooperation on clean energy and combating climate change .
And much work to be done together to take on the persistent challenges in our hemisphere , from crime to drugs to poverty , and to stand in defense of our shared values against regimes like that in Venezuela .
So the United States needs to lead in the Latin America .
And if we don't , make no mistake , others will .
China is eager to extend its influence . Strong , principled American leadership is the only answer .
That was my approach as Secretary of State and will be my priority as President .
Now it is often said that every election is about the future .
But this time , I feel it even more powerfully .
Americans have worked so hard to climb out of the hole we found ourselves in with the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression in 2008 .
Families took second jobs and second shifts . They found a way to make it work .
And now , thankfully , our economy is growing again .
Slowly but surely we also repaired America 's tarnished reputation .
We strengthened old alliances and started new partnerships . We got back to the time-tested values that made our country a beacon of hope and opportunity and freedom for the entire world .
We learned to lead in new ways for a complex and changing age .
And America is safer and stronger as a result . We cannot afford to let out-of-touch , out-of-date partisan ideas and candidates rip away all the progress we 've made .
We can't go back to cowboy diplomacy and reckless war-mongering .
We can't go back to a go-it-alone foreign policy that views American boots on the ground as a first choice rather than as a last resort .
We have paid too high a price in lives , power , and prestige to make those same mistakes again .
Instead we need a foreign policy for the future with creative , confident leadership that harnesses all of America 's strength , smarts , and values .
I believe the future holds far more opportunities than threats if we shape global events rather than reacting to them and being shaped by them .
That is what I will do as President , starting right here in our own hemisphere .
I 'm running to build an America for tomorrow , not yesterday .
For the struggling , the striving , and the successful .
For the young entrepreneur in Little Havana who dreams of expanding to Old Havana .
For the grandmother who never lost hope of seeing freedom come to the homeland she left so long ago .
For the families who are separated . For all those who have built new lives in a new land .
I 'm running for everyone who 's ever been knocked down , but refused to be knocked out .
I am running for you and I want to work with you to be your partner to build the kind of future that will once again not only make Cuban Americans successful here in our country , but give Cubans in Cuba the same chance to live up to their own potential .
Thank you all very , very much . Well , let me thank you , Strobe , it 's great to be back at Brookings , and there are a lot of long time friends and colleagues who perch here at Brookings .
Obviously including Strobe and Martin who I 'll speak to in a minute .
Also Bob Einhorn and Tammy Wittes . This institution has hosted many important conversations over the years , and I appreciate Strobe 's reference to the event last night and the continuing dialogue about urgent issues facing our nation and world .
That 's what brings me here today back to Brookings to talk about a question we are all grappling with right now : how to prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon and more broadly , how to protect ourselves and our allies from the full range of threats that Iran poses .
The stakes are high , and there are no simple or perfectly satisfying solutions .
So these questions and in particular , the merits of the nuclear deal recently reached with Iran have divided people of good will and raised hard issues on both sides .
Here 's how I see it . Either we move forward on the path of diplomacy and seize this chance to block Iran 's path to a nuclear weapon or , we turn down a more dangerous path leading to a far less certain and riskier future .
That 's why I support this deal . I support it as part of a larger strategy toward Iran .
By now , the outcome in Congress is no longer in much doubt .
So we 've got to start looking ahead to what comes next : enforcing the deal , deterring Iran and its proxies , and strengthening our allies .
These will be my goals as president . And today , I want to talk about how I would achieve them .
Let me start by saying I understand the skepticism so many feel about Iran .
I too am deeply concerned about Iranian aggression and the need to confront it .
It 's a ruthless , brutal regime that has the blood of Americans , many others , including its own people , on its hands .
Its political rallies resound with cries of Death to America .
Its leaders talk about wiping Israel off the face of the map , most recently just yesterday , and foment terror against it .
There is absolutely no reason to trust Iran . Now , Vice President Cheney may hope that the American people will simply forget , but the truth is , by the time President Obama took office and I became secretary of state , Iran was racing toward a nuclear capability .
They had mastered the nuclear fuel cycle meaning that they had the material , scientists , and technical know-how to create material for nuclear weapons .
They had produced and installed thousands of centrifuges , expanded their secret facilities , established a robust uranium enrichment program , and defied their international obligations under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty .
And they hadn't suffered many consequences . I voted for sanctions again and again as a Senator from New York , but they weren't having much effect .
Most of the world still did business with Iran . We needed to step up our game .
So President Obama and I pursued a two-pronged strategy : pressure and engagement .
We made it clear that the door to diplomacy was open if Iran answered the concerns of the international community in a serious and credible way .
We simultaneously launched a comprehensive campaign to significantly raise the cost of Iranian defiance .
We systematically increased our military capabilities in the region , deepening our cooperation with partners and sending more firepower an additional aircraft carrier , battleship , strike aircraft , and the most advanced radar and missile defense systems available .
Meanwhile , I traveled the world capital by capital , leader by leader twisting arms to help build the global coalition that produced some of the most effective sanctions in history .
With President Obama 's leadership , we worked with Congress and the European Union to cut Iran off from the world 's economic and financial system .
And one by one , we persuaded energy-hungry consumers of Iranian oil like India and South Korea to cut back .
Soon , Iran 's tankers sat rusting in port . Its economy was collapsing .
These new measures were effective because we made them global .
American sanctions provided the foundation but Iran didn't really feel the heat until we turned this into an international campaign so biting that Iran had no choice but to negotiate .
They could no longer play off one country against another .
They had no place to hide . So , they started looking for a way out .
I first visited Oman to speak with the sultan of Oman in January of 2011 .
Went back later that year . The sultan helped set up a secret backchannel .
I sent one of my closest aides as part of a small team to begin talks with the Iranians in secret .
Negotiations began in earnest after the Iranian election in 2013 first the bilateral talks led by Deputy Secretary Bill Burns and Jake Sullivan that led to the interim agreement ; then the multilateral talks led by Secretary John Kerry , Secretary Ernie Moniz , and Under Secretary Wendy Sherman .
Now there 's a comprehensive agreement on Iran 's nuclear program .
Is it perfect ? Well , of course not . No agreement like this ever is .
But is it a strong agreement ? Yes it is .
And we absolutely should not turn it down . The merits of the deal have been well argued , so I won't go through them in great detail here .
The bottom line is that it accomplishes the major goals we set out to achieve .
It blocks every pathway for Iran to get a bomb .
And it gives us better tools for verification and inspection , and to compel rigorous compliance .
Without a deal , Iran 's breakout time how long they need to produce enough material for a nuclear weapon would shrink to a couple of months .
With a deal , that breakout time stretches to a year , which means that if Iran cheats , we 'll know it and we 'll have time to respond decisively .
Without a deal , we would have no credible inspections of Iran 's nuclear facilities .
With a deal , we 'll have unprecedented access . We 'll be able to monitor every aspect of their nuclear program .
Now , some have expressed concern that certain nuclear restrictions expire after 15 years , and we need to be vigilant about that , which I 'll talk more about in a moment .
But other parts are permanent , including Iran 's obligations under the Non-Proliferation Treaty and their commitment to enhanced inspections under the additional protocol .
Others have expressed concern that it could take up to 24 days to gain access to some of Iran 's facilities when we suspect cheating .
I 'd be the first to say that this part of the deal is not perfect although the deal does allow for daily access to enrichment facilities and monitoring of the entire nuclear fuel cycle .
It 's important to focus on that because being able to monitor the supply chain is critical to what we will find out and how we will be able to respond .
But our experts tell us that that even with delayed access to some places , this deal does the job .
Microscopic nuclear particles remain for years and years . They are impossible to hide .
That 's why Secretary Moniz , a nuclear physicist , has confidence in this plan .
And some have suggested that we just go back to the negotiating table and get a better , unspecified deal .
I can certainly understand why that may sound appealing . But as someone who started these talks in the first place and built our global coalition piece by piece , I can assure you , it is not realistic .
Plus , if we walk away now , our capacity to sustain and enforce sanctions will be severely diminished .
We will be blamed , not the Iranians . So if we were to reject this agreement , Iran would be poised to get nearly everything it wants without giving up a thing .
No restrictions on their nuclear program . No real warning if Tehran suddenly rushes toward a bomb .
And the international sanctions regime would fall apart so no more economic consequences for Iran , either .
Those of us who have been out there on the diplomatic front lines know that diplomacy is not the pursuit of it 's the balancing of risk .
And on balance , the far riskier course right now would be to walk away .
Great powers can't just junk agreements and expect the rest of the world to go along with us .
We need to be reasonable and consistent , and we need to keep our word especially when we 're trying to lead a coalition .
That 's how we 'll make this and future deals work .
But it 's not enough just to say yes to this deal .
Of course it isn't . We have to say ,
Yes and . Yes , and we will enforce it with vigor and vigilance .
Yes , and we will embed it in a broader strategy to confront Iran 's bad behavior in the region .
Yes , and we will begin from day one to set the conditions so Iran knows it will never be able to get a nuclear weapon not during the term of the agreement , not after , not ever .
We need to be clear and I think we have to make that very clear to Iran about what we expect from them .
This is not the start of some larger diplomatic opening .
And we shouldn't expect that this deal will lead to broader changes in their behavior .
That shouldn't be a promise for proceeding . Instead , we need to be prepared for three scenarios .
First , Iran tries to cheat something it 's been quite willing to do in the past .
Second , Iran tries to wait us out . Perhaps it waits to move for 15 years , when some but not all restrictions expire .
And third , Iran ramps up its dangerous behavior in the region , including its support for terrorist groups like Hamas and Hezbollah .
I believe that the success of this deal has a lot to do with how the next president grapples with these challenges .
So let me tell you what I would do . My starting point will be one of distrust .
You remember President Reagan 's line about the Soviets trust , but verify ?
My approach will be distrust , and verify . We should anticipate that Iran will test the next president .
They 'll want to see how far they can bend the rules .
That won't work if I 'm in the White House .
I 'll hold the line against Iranian non-compliance . That means penalties even for small violations .
Keeping our allies on board but being willing to snap back sanctions into place unilaterally if we have to .
Working with Congress to close any gaps in the sanctions .
Right now , members of Congress are offering proposals to that effect , and I think the current administration should work with them to see whether there are additional steps that could be taken .
Finally , it means ensuring that the IAEA has the resources it needs from finances to personnel to equipment to hold Iran 's feet to the fire .
But the most important thing we can do to keep Iran from cheating or trying to wait us out is to shape Iranian expectations right from the start .
The Iranians and the world need to understand that we will act decisively if we need to .
So here 's my message to Iran 's leaders : The United States will never allow you to acquire a nuclear weapon .
As president , I will take whatever actions are necessary to protect the United States and our allies .
I will not hesitate to take military action if Iran attempts to obtain a nuclear weapon .
And I will set up my successor to be able to credibly make the same pledge .
We will make clear to Iran that our national commitment to prevention will not waver depending on who 's in office .
It 's permanent . And should it become necessary in the future , having exhausted peaceful alternatives , to turn to military force , we will have preserved and in some cases enhanced our capacity to act .
And because we 've proven our commitment to diplomacy first , the world will more likely join us .
Then there 's the broader issue of countering Iran 's bad behavior across the region .
Taking nuclear weapons out of the equation is crucial , because an Iran with nuclear weapons is so much more dangerous than an Iran without them .
But even without nuclear weapons , we still see Iran 's fingerprints on nearly every conflict across the Middle East .
They support bad actors from Syria to Lebanon to Yemen .
They vow to destroy Israel . And that 's worth saying again they vow to destroy Israel .
We cannot ever take that lightly , particularly when Iran ships advanced missiles to Hezbollah and the Ayatollah outlines an actual strategy for eliminating Israel or talks about how Israel won't exist in 25 years , just like he did today .
And in addition to all the malicious activity they already underwrite , we 've got to anticipate that Iran could use some of the economic relief they get from this deal to pay for even more .
So as president , I will raise the costs for their actions , and confront them across the board .
My strategy will be based on five strong pillars . First , I will deepen America 's unshakeable commitment to Israel 's security , including our long-standing tradition of guaranteeing Israel 's Qualitative Military Edge .
I 'll increase support for Israeli rocket and missile defenses , and for intelligence sharing .
I 'll sell Israel the most sophisticated fighter aircraft ever developed , the F-35 .
We 'll work together to develop and implement better tunnel detection technology to prevent arms smuggling and kidnapping , as well as the strongest possible missile defense system for northern Israel , which has been subjected to Hezbollah 's attacks for years .
Second , I will reaffirm that the Persian Gulf is a region of vital interest to the United States .
We don't want any of Iran 's neighbors to develop or acquire a nuclear weapons program either so we want them to feel and be secure .
I will sustain a robust military presence in the region , especially our air and naval forces .
We 'll keep the Strait of Hormuz open . We 'll increase security cooperation with our Gulf allies including intelligence sharing , military support and missile defense to ensure they can defend against Iranian aggression , even if that takes the form of cyber-attacks or other non-traditional threats .
Iran should understand that the United States and I as president will not stand by as our Gulf allies and partners are threatened .
We will act . Third , I will build a coalition to counter Iran 's proxies , particularly Hezbollah .
That means enforcing and strengthening the rules prohibiting the transfer of weapons to Hezbollah , looking at new ways to choke off their funding , and pressing our partners to treat Hezbollah as the terrorist organization it is .
It 's time to eliminate the false distinction that some still make between the supposed political and military wings .
If you 're part of Hezbollah , you 're part of a terrorist organization , plain and simple .
Beyond Hezbollah , I 'll crack down on the shipment of weapons to Hamas , and push Turkey and Qatar to end their financial support .
I 'll press our partners in the region to prevent aircraft and ships owned by companies linked to Iran 's Revolutionary Guard from entering their territories , and urge our partners to block Iranian planes from entering their airspace on their way to Yemen and Syria .
Across the board , I will vigorously enforce and strengthen if necessary the American sanctions on Iran and its Revolutionary Guard for its sponsorship of terrorism , its ballistic missile program , and other destabilizing activities .
I 'll enforce and strengthen if necessary our restrictions on sending arms to Iran , and from Iran to bad actors like Syria .
And I 'll impose these sanctions on everyone involved in these activities whether they 're in Iran or overseas .
This will be a special imperative as some of the UN sanctions lapse .
So the U.S. and our partners have to step up .
Fourth , I 'll stand as I always have against Iran 's abuses at home , from its detention of political prisoners to its crackdown on freedom of expression , including online .
Its inhumane policies hold back talented and spirited people . Our quarrel is not and never has been with the Iranian they 'd have a bright future , a hopeful future , if they weren't held back by their leaders .
As I 've said before , I think we were too restrained in our support of the protests in June 2009 and in our condemnation of the government crackdown that followed that won't happen again .
We will enforce and if need be broaden our human rights sanctions .
And I will not rest until every single American detained or missing in Iran is home .
Fifth , just as the nuclear agreement needs to be embedded in a broader Iran policy , our broader Iran policy needs to be embedded in a comprehensive regional strategy that promotes stability and counters extremism .
Iran , like ISIS , benefits from chaos and strife .
It exploits other countries ' weaknesses . And the best defense against Iran are countries and governments that are strong that can provide security and economic opportunity to their people and they must have the tools to push back on radicalization and extremism .
Helping countries get there will take time and strategic discipline .
But it 's crucial that the United States leads this effort .
I will push for renewed diplomacy to solve the destructive regional conflicts that Iran fuels .
We have to bring sufficient pressure on Assad to force a political solution in Syria , including a meaningful increase in our efforts to train and equip the moderate Syrian opposition something I called for early in the conflict .
And the United States must lead in assisting those who have been uprooted by conflict especially the millions of Syrian refugees now beseeching the world to help them .
As Pope Francis has reminded us , this is an international problem that demands an international response and United States must help lead that response .
That 's who we are , and that 's what we do .
So our strategy needs to cover all these bases . Iran 's nuclear ambitions and its support of terrorism .
Its hatred of Israel and its cruelty toward its citizens .
Its military resources and its economic strengths and weaknesses . We need to be creative , committed , and vigilant .
And on every front , we need to keep working closely with our friends and partners .
On that note , let me just spend a moment speaking about the serious concerns that Israel 's leaders have about this deal .
Israel has every reason to be alarmed by a regime that both denies its existence and seeks its destruction .
I would not support this agreement for one second if I thought it put Israel in greater danger .
I believe in my core that Israel and America must stand side by side .
And I will always stand by Israel 's right to defend itself as I always have .
I believe this deal , and a joint strategy for enforcing it , makes Israel safer .
I say that with humility . I 'm not Israeli .
I don't know what it 's like to live under constant threat from your neighbors , in a country where the margin for error is so thin .
I know that my saying , This deal makes you safer , won't alleviate the very real fears of the Israeli people .
But I have stood for Israel 's security for a very long time .
It was one of my bedrock principles as secretary of state .
It 's why I supported stronger defense systems , like the Iron Dome anti-rocket defense system , which proved so effective in protecting Israeli lives during the conflicts of 2012 and last summer .
It 's why I 've worked closely with Israel to advance the two-state vision of a Jewish and democratic Israel with secure and recognized borders .
And it 's why I believe we should expedite negotiations of a long-term military assistance agreement with Israel .
Let 's not wait until 2017 , when the current deal let 's get it done this year .
I would invite the Israeli prime minister to the White House during my first month in office , to talk about all of these issues and to set us on a course of close , frequent consultation , right from the start .
Because we both rely on each other for support , as partners , allies and friends .
This isn't just about policy for me . It is personal .
As president , I 'm committed to shoring up and strengthening the relationship between our countries .
We have had honest disagreements about this deal . Now is the time to come together .
Now is the time to remember what unites us , and build upon it .
And so , I know well that the same forces that threaten Israel , threaten the United States .
And to the people of Israel , let me you 'll never have to question whether we 're with you .
The United States will always be with you . There have also been honest disagreements about the nuclear deal here at home .
Smart , serious people can see issues like these differently .
Like my friend , Chuck Schumer , who 's going to be an excellent leader in the Senate I respect the skepticism that he and others feel .
And I respect differences of opinion , and people who advocate vigorously for their beliefs .
But I have a harder time respecting those who approach an issue as serious as this with unserious talk especially anyone running to be president of the United States .
Several Republican candidates boast they 'll tear up this agreement in 2017 , more than a year after it 's been implemented .
That 's not that 's recklessness . It would set us right down the very dangerous path we 've worked so hard to avoid .
I 'm looking forward to a robust debate about foreign policy in this campaign .
Where we have disagreements , we should lay them out like if American ground forces in Iraq should engage in direct combat , as Scott Walker wants ; or if we should keep Cuba closed , as Marco Rubio and Jeb Bush want .
Let 's debate these issues . But let 's debate them on the basis of facts , not fear .
Let 's resist denigrating the patriotism or loyalty of those who disagree with us .
And let 's avoid at all costs undermining America 's credibility abroad .
That only makes us weaker , and I 'm going to call it out whenever I see it .
I spent four years representing America abroad as America 's secretary of state .
It was one of the greatest privileges of my life .
And knowing that my fellow Americans were counting on me , and rooting for me not as democrats , not as republicans , but as Americans meant a great deal .
We are all one team the American team . And that doesn't change , no matter how much we might disagree .
And I can tell you from personal experience we are stronger overseas when we are united at home .
So we simply have to find a way to work together better than we have been doing .
There 's a lot that Democrats and Republicans can and should agree on .
The United States should lead in the Middle East we can agree on that .
We should stand by our friends against Iranian aggression we can agree on that , too .
I believe that the plan I 've laid out today is one that all Americans could endorse , and I hope they will .
The next president will face threats from many quarters from those we see today , like terrorism from ISIS , aggressiveness from Putin , pandemics like Ebola , to all those we can't predict yet .
We need a leader who has a strong vision for the future , and the skill and determination to get us there .
We can't stop the world from changing . But we can help to shape those changes .
And we do that by leading with strength , smarts , and an unyielding commitment to our values .
You know I saw that when I was first lady , senator and secretary of state , that when America leads with principle and purpose , other people and governments are eager to join us .
No country comes close to matching our advantages the strength of our economy , the skill of our workforce , our tradition of innovation , our unmatched network of alliances and partnerships .
So we are poised to remain the world 's most admired and powerful nation for a long time if we make the smart choices , and practice smart leadership .
That 's what I will try to do as your president .
And I believe as strongly as ever that our best days are ahead of us and that America 's greatest contributions to the world are yet to come .
Thank you . Well , this is the day the Lord has made .
Let us rejoice and be glad . You know , it doesn't get much better than being in a House of Prayer .
Introduced by your great pastor , who hails from Pine Bluff , Arkansas .
It 's a small world , but great world . I am so grateful to Pastor Stewart , to this congregation for giving me the chance to come to say a few words that are in my heart about this community .
And I want to thank and lift up your mayor a mayor who is a true servant leader , someone who is working every way she knows how to provide the help and support that all the people of Flint deserve to have , and in particular the children of this community .
I feel blessed to be here with you , wishing it were for a different reason .
I wish I was here only to celebrate the good things that are happening in this church and in this community young people starting out for themselves as community leaders , working to bring the city together , the ministers that guide you in faith and worship .
I am here because for almost two years , Flint 's water was poisoned .
I 'm here because for nearly two years , mothers and fathers were voicing concerns about the water 's color , the smell , the rashes it gave to those bathing in it .
For nearly two years , you were told , Flint was told the water was safe .
I have just met with two young mothers who have told me the stories of their experiences and particularly what has happening to their children : ER visits that had never occurred before , strange behavior that had never been a problem before , worries about what 's down the road in terms of the development and life of these precious children .
One young woman said , I 'm not supposed to be talking to my friends about how much medication we 're taking , what kind of stresses we 're under , but that 's what we talk about now .
I thank the elected officials that are here , the pastor asked them to stand , and I appreciate the work they do greatly at the city , the county and the federal level .
I had the opportunity to be with my friend and your Senator , Debbie Stabenow , who is working hard , along with your other Senator , Gary Peters , and the Congressmen who are here as well , Congressmen Kildee and Levin and others , to try to get support and help from the federal government .
But I want you to know that this has to be a national priority , not just today or tomorrow .
Clean water is not optional , my friends . It is not a luxury .
I said weeks ago , if the same thing that 's happening in Flint had happened in Grosse Pointe or Bloomfield Hills , I think we all know that we would 've had a solution yesterday .
This is not merely unacceptable or wrong , though it is both .
What happened in Flint is immoral . The children of Flint are just as precious as the children in any other part of America .
They are just as deserving of good health care , a good education , and of bright futures .
My first job out of law school was working for the most extraordinary Marion Wright Edelman at the Children 's Defense Fund .
I went to work there because I believed because of the lessons and examples of my mother and my church , that every child , every single child , should have the chance to live up to his or her god given potential in this country of ours .
We don't yet know how many children have been affected by lead poisoning .
We don't yet know how many challenges they might face in the years ahead .
But what we do know , we know that even a single child suffering lead poisoning due to the state 's neglect is one child too many .
And we also know we need action now not next month , next year , down the road we need action now .
Senator Stabenow and Peters , and your other congressional representatives are working to pass an amendment to get $200 million dollars to fix Flint 's water infrastructure .
Congress needs to pass that bill immediately . This is no time for politics as usual .
Flint should be able to start making the repairs you need to restore safe water as soon as possible .
But it 's not only the physical infrastructure that needs to be fixed .
It 's the human beings . We need to do so much more to provide health care and educational supports for Flint 's children .
To test for lead and its effects on an ongoing basis and treat them .
You can't just take one test and know you 're safe .
We need to make sure Flint 's kids are getting good nutrition , to help counter the effects of the lead .
We need to expand Early Head Start , nurse home visiting programs , special education funding , all of which must be used to address the damage that lead poisoning can cause .
I have seen for myself , my friends , the incredible things these programs can do .
For eight years , I represented New York . Our problem with lead poisoning in New York was not the water , it was the lead based paint on the old houses that people lived in .
It was the crumbling , turning into dust of that .
It was little toddlers , crawling on the floor , picking things up , licking things as babies do .
It was breathing it . And we had in so many places , especially in New England and the Mid-Atlantic and Midwest with a lot of older housing stock and a lot of challenges , we had problems .
So as a Senator I fought for children struggling to bear heavy burdens , and I will fight for you in Flint , no matter how long it takes .
We also need to repair the bonds of trust that have been broken here in Flint .
That means giving you transparent information about every part of the response to this crisis .
The people of this community should know what the plan is for repairing the infrastructure , when the work will be done in your neighborhood .
You should know whether you need to replace pipes and fixtures in your own homes .
And I also , as the mayor and I were just talking , I want to figure out if there is some way that we can empower and hire citizens of Flint to do the work that needs to be done in this city .
And in addition , I think we should send a lot more Americorps volunteers to come here as we put young people to work in Flint , working side by side with those who are part of the national service , of our federal government , realizing that yes , this is problem that affects Flint , but I dare say there are other communities with similar problems .
This is not the only place where children are being harmed by what they breathe and what they drink .
And you should have all the information you need to know what this means for your children and grandchildren , what 's true about what lead poisoning and what isn't , what the challenges are , what you could do to help and where you can turn to help .
Now I know this is going to take time and it 's not going to be easy .
But repairing trust is as important as repairing pipes . We need to be able to lift each other up again , we have to trust each other , to count on each other to truly be our brother 's and our sister 's keepers .
When I first heard about what was happening here , I was so angry .
I was outraged . And I know you must feel exactly the same .
When I talked to those three young women before coming out here , when I looked at the children of one of them , I was just heartsick .
You try to do everything right , don't you ? As a parent and a grandparent , you want the best for those children that are such gifts and something out of your control that you think you could trust has made it so much harder , has erected obstacles where there weren't any before .
I wanted to come today and support your mayor and other officials who are fighting for you , also to support the faith community , which I know Pastor , will have to play a big role in working to get information out and helping to organize people and trying to empower members of congregations .
And I want you to understand that this is , for me , a personal commitment .
I will stand with you every step of the way .
I will not for one minute forget about you or forget about your children , I will do everything I can to help you get back up , to get your strength and resilience flowing through this community again , because what happened here should never have happened anywhere .
As you may know , I am now a grandmother and it is the best experience ever .
And I am lucky enough that my daughter and son-in-law send me pictures all the time , because when I cannot see her I miss her so much .
And I was looking as some of those pictures on my phone as I was coming here this morning .
And I literally could not imagine what I would be feeling if that little face I was looking at was one of the faces of the children that you know and love so well .
So I want to thank those who have been calling for action for so long , your Mayor , the mothers , the fathers , Dr. Mona , Marc Edwards , Senator Stabenow and Peters , Congressman Kildee , all who are working to try to get the help that you need .
I also want to encourage Americans across our country and I 'm pleased that the press is here because we need to keep the spotlight bright .
And I want to encourage Americans to donate Flintkids.org and other organizations as a way of helping .
I want to single out a group that came to my attention .
Inmates at Handlon Correctional Facility in Ionia have pledged as much as a third of their monthly prison incomes .
They want to help you buy filters and bottled water .
They don't earn much but they are moved to help this city .
We know we need more action , do not grow weary doing good , do not get discouraged , do not give up , the road is long and I know that there will be a lot of bumps along its way , but this is the most important work we are ever called to do , to reach out in every way we can no matter who we are , to lend that helping hand , that support , that love , that sense of possibility again for every single person in Flint .
I will be there with you , and I will make sure in any way I can that America stays with you too .
And I look forward to coming back to Flint , to seeing this community rise , rise again , rise with determination , resilience , support , service , leadership , we can do this .
Let 's make sure we take care of the people of Flint and give every child a chance to live up to his or her God-given potential .
Thank you all and God bless you . During a speech at the National Immigrant Integration Conference in Brooklyn , Hillary Clinton built on her immigration proposals to keep families together by promoting naturalization through the expansion of fee waivers and by providing additional support to help the millions of people who are eligible for citizenship .
Clinton also discussed her commitment to comprehensive immigration reform with a path to full and equal citizenship , as well as how she would defend the president 's executive actions on immigration and go further .
Congressman Luis Gutirrez introduced and endorsed Clinton at the event .
Thank you very , very much . It is such a pleasure to be here at this 2015 National Immigrant Integration Conference and I love the idea of integration .
We are going to be emphasizing that . We are going to do as much of it as we possibly can .
I want to thank National Partnership for New Americans and the New York Immigration Coalition for bringing us together , as well as everyone from the Fair Immigration Reform movement .
We could not have picked a better city for this meeting .
We would not be New York without the generations of immigrants from everywhere .
Asian , Pacific Islander , Latino , African , Caribbean , European , Middle Eastern , everyone who worked hard and raised families and put down roots in this country .
We should never forget that . We should never let anyone forget that .
This story needs to be told over and over again .
I want to thank my friend and a great leader on so many issues , but particularly on this one , Luis Gutirrez .
Few people have done as much as Luis to make sure that when it comes to America 's policies on immigration , those policies reflect America 's values .
He organizes , strategizes , preaches , teaches , inspires , cajoles , whatever it takes to keep this movement moving forward .
And you know that he understands the fight to ensure that America 's immigrants are treated with dignity is , as he just said , bound up with all the other fights to advance human dignity and human rights , the fight to defend workers ' rights , to end poverty , reduce economic inequality , the fight for women 's rights , LGBT rights and human rights here and abroad .
Ultimate struggles come down to the same fundamental question : Whose humanity will we recognize ?
And Luis ' answer is the right answer : everyone 's .
That 's why he is a great congressman and a great leader , and why I am so proud to have his support in this campaign to become president of the United States .
And to all the lawyers , advocates , organizers , experts , and immigrants who are here today , I want to thank you for what you do every day .
You are at the front lines of one of the most complex and emotionally wrenching areas of American law and policy .
I know that you advocate for children who are trying to navigate the system alone .
I just said hello to a young man that I have seen before because he serves on the wait staff of a restaurant that I go to .
He came here alone at fifteen and is making his way .
You help people who are desperate for jobs to get work permits .
You help parents get legal status so they can stay with their kids .
That means we keep families together instead of breaking them apart .
You do your jobs expertly with great empathy and a deep commitment to justice .
I don't think you get thanked nearly enough , so thank you .
Thank you for doing what is so important and right in our country .
I want to thank somebody really special , which I am sure is going to embarrass her , but I 'll do it anyway .
Lorella Praeli , who was born in Peru , came to the United States as little girl for medical treatment .
Eventually , she and her mother and sister moved here permanently .
Her sister and her father are here with us today .
Lorella excelled all the way through school . When it came time for college , she did what millions of high school students do every year , fill out that ridiculous , long , confusing FAFSA form , which I am going to eliminate when I am president of the United States .
Honestly , you should be able to do that in a page , or a half a page , so that 's a promise .
It was when filling out the form , she found out she was undocumented .
But she went to college anyway because her grades got her a full scholarship .
She decided she didn't want to live in fear or secrecy , like so many undocumented immigrants feel they must do .
She was convinced that this was her country , and that she had something special to offer .
So she came forward , publicly , as undocumented . She joined the United We Dream movement , advocating for all the young people brought here as children .
And in part because of those DREAMers like her , President Obama implemented DACA
, he implemented DAPA . Now Lorella is the director of Latino outreach on my campaign .
I am so lucky to have her . Listen to this , because this is really amazing .
After this conference , she 's heading down to Washington , where tomorrow , at the National Archives , President Obama will swear her in as a citizen of the United States of America .
Lorella 's story , like so many others American stories , remind us of who we are as a people .
We are a big country and we should never forget that and we shouldn't let anybody on the public stage say that we are mean spirited , that we are going to build walls , mentally and physically , or that we are going to shut doors .
We are a country where people of all backgrounds , all nations of origin , all languages , all religions , all races , can make a home .
America was built by immigrants , and you know so well our economy depends on immigrants .
Our future will be always written in part by immigrants .
I wish all this could go without saying , but look , now more than ever it needs to be said .
We are hearing all kinds of anti-immigrant sentiment in the news right now .
Candidates for president are calling immigrants drug runners and rapists .
They promise , if elected , to round up and deport millions of people , build a mammoth wall , militarize the border , tear families apart .
And after the terrorist shootings in San Bernardino , at a time when a lot of Americans are fearful about future attacks here at home , some candidates are even stoking those fears more and turning people against Muslim Americans , saying some really hateful , hurtful things .
Meanwhile , our policies towards immigrants , and also towards refugees and asylum seekers , are being hotly debated .
Now this election , which we know is going to have a big impact on our future , has now become even more consequential .
So I 'm here today to tell you where I stand , what I believe , and what I will fight for as president .
And here 's my starting point : our immigration system is broken and we need to keep families together .
Millions of undocumented people are living and working and raising their families here , we could add hundreds of billions of dollars to our GDP by passing comprehensive immigration reform , which is why people across the political spectrum from labor unions to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce supported the 2013 senate bill .
But ultimately , for me , this is far more than an economic issue this is a family issue .
I want to put an end to families being torn apart or hardworking , law-abiding parents having to prepare their kids for the day mom or dad might be taken away .
That 's why I still passionately support comprehensive immigration reform legislation with a path to full and equal citizenship .
If you work hard , if you love this country , if you contribute to it , and want nothing more than to build a good future for yourselves and your children , we should give you a way to come forward and become a citizen .
And you know what ? The majority of Americans agree .
They know it 's the right thing to do . Now , you know Senator Rubio actually helped write the 2013 senate bill , now he renounces it .
They 're all moving toward the extreme end , away from the rest of America .
Now , I know it was a blow to a lot of people in this room and across our country when that 2013 bill failed .
We were so close , but we can't stay discouraged .
We 've got to keep pushing Congress to act and we 've got to keep raising the stakes , so candidates and elected officials know there will be consequences if they do not support comprehensive immigration reform .
But having said that , we also can't wait for the Congress .
Too many families ' futures hang in the balance . So you can count on me to defend President Obama 's executive actions on DACA and DAPA when I am president .
Before coming out here today , the Congressman and I had coffee with the Suarez family , Osman and Jonalee and their daughters Marci , Clarissa and Angie .
Osman and Jonalee are from Honduras , they made the journey to the States years ago to get away from rising violence and to give their daughters the chance at a better life .
Now the Suarezes live on Long Island . They work hard .
They 're a close and loving family , and they 're dealing with the harsh reality of a broken immigration system everyday , because their dad is undocumented .
So in this family of five , think how complicated and frightening that must be .
I 'm thinking , I was saying to Luis , I don't know how anyone seeing the Suarezes , hearing their story , don't see how much they love each other , how grateful they are for being here and how much they love this country , and not think something 's got to change .
These are real live human beings . Yet too often , our system fails to see or recognize that .
We have got to do better for the Suarezes and for the millions of other families trying to live decent lives in America , just like the rest of us .
Now I know , of course , we 're not only a nation of immigrants ; we 're a nation of laws too .
And we do have to enforce our laws , but we should do it in a humane , targeted , and effective ways .
I agree with President Obama , we don't have endless resources , so we need to use them wisely .
That means prioritize whom to deport : dangerous criminals , yes ; DREAMers and their families , no .
There are people in immigration detention right now who are on a hunger strike .
We need to be focused on detention conditions , and as president I 'll close private immigration detention centers .
This is a critical government responsibility and we should not be outsourcing it to anyone else .
I 'll also end family detention , we have good alternatives and we should use them .
I 'll work to ensure that every single refugee who seeks asylum in the United States has a fair chance to tell his or her story , this is the least we can offer people fleeing persecution and devastation .
And finally , we 've got to do more to help people who are eligible for citizenship take that last step .
There are millions of people in America who could be naturalized , but for one reason or another , they 're not .
So let 's help more of our neighbors claim their rights .
It 's so powerful , so precious , to be a citizen of the United States !
To be able to vote in our elections , to have a voice in our future , and I want to take down the barriers that are holding people back .
So here 's a few things I will do : I will work to expand fee waivers , so more people seeking naturalization can get a break on the costs .
I will increase access to language programs to help people boost their English proficiency .
I will enhance outreach and education so more people know their options and are engaged in the process .
I don't want anyone who could be a citizen to miss out on that opportunity .
Something I say a lot on the campaign trail : When somebody tells you what they want to do , believe them .
People running for president are telling America that , and by telling them that they are telling us who they are .
They are promising to enact harsher laws , they are telling us how they see immigrants as threats and criminals , they are sharing their vision for our country that would drag us backwards .
I believe in an America where everyone is treated with dignity , no matter who you are or where you come from .
And where undocumented children who have been here their whole lives and feel like Americans and are treated like Americans .
And where families are not ripped apart , but are treated humanely and respectfully .
I believe in an America that is strong , secure , and true to our values .
And I know that is possible . And as president I will work with you I want to be your partner .
So thank you for what you are doing , but even more than that , thank you , thank you for what we will do together .
Thank you all very much ! During remarks at the University of Minnesota , Hillary Clinton laid out a 360-degree strategy to keep America safe
a plan to protect the homeland from terrorist threats , including from domestic radicalization .
Her plan seeks to counter terrorism from every angle and stop every step in the process that could lead to another San Bernardino , from recruitment to training to planning attacks .
Her homeland security plan is just one element of the three-pronged strategy that she laid out at the Council for Foreign Relations for defeating ISIS and combating terrorism globally .
In the wake of the horrific attacks in San Bernardino , Hillary reiterated her call for the nation to come together and show resolve , as the United States has done in the face of so many challenges before .
Thank you . Thank you all very much . Thank you .
Thank you . I 'm delighted to be here at this great university , one of the premier public institutions of higher education in our entire country .
Yes , indeed . Just , you know , one of those statements of fact that deserves a response .
I want to thank my longtime friend , Vice President Mondale , for his kind words .
His support in this campaign means a great deal to me personally , because I admire so much his service to our country .
He is a great Minnesotan and a great American , and we 're so privileged to have him with us today .
I also want to acknowledge a few of the other elected officials who are here .
I am , of course absolutely delighted to be joined by former colleagues and friends , your senators , Amy Klobuchar and Al Franken , who are quite the dynamic duo for your state .
And I am grateful to them for everything they 're doing and for their help and support of my campaign .
I also want to thank Tina Smith , your lieutenant governor , and Steve Simon , your secretary of state .
And I understand that Betsy Hodges is here , Mayor of Minneapolis .
And I also want to acknowledge the dean of the Humphrey School , Eric Schwartz .
Eric was my top adviser on refugee issues at the State Department .
I also had the great privilege of working with him when he was on the National Security Council during my husband 's administration .
You know , he brings a mix of expertise and empathy that has been conspicuously missing from much of our public debate .
And I am grateful he is here today , but I 'm also a little jealous that all of you here at the university get to have the benefit of his experience .
You know , over the past several months , I have listened to the problems that keep American families up at night .
Now , most people don't expect life to be easy , but they do want more security , a good-paying job that lets you afford a middle class lifestyle , health care you can count on , a little bit put away for your retirement .
Being secure also means being safe , safe at home , at school , at work .
And today , I want to talk about how we keep our country safe from a threat that 's on everyone 's minds , the threat of terrorism .
But I want to begin by saying , we cannot give in to fear .
We can't let it stop us from doing what is right and necessary to make us safe , and doing it in way that is consistent with our values .
We cannot let fear push us into reckless actions that end up making us less safe .
Americans are going to have to act with both courage and clarity .
Now , as we all know , on December 2nd , two shooters killed 14 people at a holiday party in San Bernardino , California .
Sadly , in America in 2015 , turning on the news and hearing about a mass shooting is not unusual .
But this one turned out to be different , because these killers were a husband and wife inspired by ISIS .
Americans have experienced terrorism before . On 9/11 , we learned that terrorists in Afghanistan could strike our homeland .
From Fort Hood to Chattanooga to the Boston Marathon , we saw people radicalized here carrying out deadly attacks .
But San Bernardino felt different . Maybe it was the timing , coming so soon after Paris .
Maybe it was how random it seemed , a terrorist attack in a suburban office park , not a high-profile target or symbol of American power .
It made us all feel it could have been anywhere , at any time .
The phrase active shooter should not be one we have to teach our children .
But it is . And now we are all grappling with what all this means for our future , for our safety , our sense of well-being , and our trust and connections with our neighbors .
We want to be open-hearted , and we want to celebrate America 's diversity , not fear it .
And while we know the overwhelming majority of people here and around the world hate ISIS and love peace , we do have to be prepared for more terrorists plotting attacks .
Just yesterday , a man in Maryland was charged with receiving thousands of dollars from ISIS for use in planning an attack .
And here in Minnesota , authorities have charged ten men with conspiring to provide material support to ISIS .
But in the Twin Cities , you have also seen firsthand how communities come together to resist radicalization : local imams condemning terrorist violence , local artists and activists pushing back against terrorist propaganda .
I just met with a group of community leaders who told me about some of the work and the challenges that they are dealing with .
As the first Somali-American police sergeant in Minnesota , and probably in the country , said recently ,
safety is a shared responsibility , so we have to work together .
The threat we face is daunting . But America has overcome big challenges many times before .
Throughout our history , we 've stared into the face of evil and refused to blink .
We beat fascism , won the Cold War , brought Osama bin Laden to justice .
So no one should ever underestimate the determination of the American people .
And I am confident we will once again choose resolve over fear .
And we will defeat these new enemies , just as we 've defeated those who 've threatened us in the past .
Because it is not enough to contain ISIS , we must defeat ISIS , break its momentum and then its back .
And not just ISIS , but the broader radical jihadist movement that also includes al Qaeda and offshoots like al Shabaab in Somalia .
Now , waging and winning this fight will require serious leadership .
But unfortunately , our political debate has been anything but serious .
We can't afford another major ground war in the Middle East .
That 's exactly what ISIS wants from us . Shallow slogans don't add up to a strategy .
Promising to carpet bomb until the desert glows doesn't make you sound strong , it makes you sound like you 're in over your head .
Bluster and bigotry are not credentials for becoming commander in chief .
And it is hard to take seriously senators who talk tough but then hold up key national security nominations , including the top official at the Treasury Department responsible for disrupting terrorist financing .
Every day that 's wasted on partisan gridlock could put Americans in danger .
So , yes , we need a serious discussion . And that 's why in a speech last month before the Council on Foreign Relations I laid out a three-part plan to defeat ISIS and the broader extremist movement .
One , defeat ISIS in the Middle East by smashing its stronghold , hitting its fighters , leaders , and infrastructure from the air , and intensifying support for local forces who can pursue them on the ground .
Second , defeat them around the world by dismantling the global network of terror that supplies radical jihadists with money , arms , propaganda , and fighters .
And third , defeat them here at home by foiling plots , disrupting radicalization , and hardening our defenses .
Now , these three lines of effort reinforce one another .
So we need to pursue all of them at once , using every pillar of American power .
It will require skillful diplomacy to continue Secretary Kerry 's efforts to encourage political reconciliation in Iraq and political transition in Syria , enabling more Sunni Arabs and Kurdish fighters to take on ISIS on both sides of the border , and to get our Arab and Turkish partners to actually step up and do their part .
It will require more U.S. and allied air power , and a broader target set for strikes by planes and drones , with proper safeguards .
It will require Special Operations units to advise and train local forces and conduct key counterterrorism missions .
What it will not require is tens of thousands of American combat troops .
That is not the right action for us to take in this situation .
So there is a lot to do , and today , I want to focus on the third part of my plan , how we defend our country and prevent radicalization here at home .
We need a comprehensive strategy to counter each step in the process that can lead to an attack like the one in San Bernardino .
First , we have to shut down ISIS recruitment in the United States , especially online .
Second , stop would-be jihadists from getting training overseas , and stop foreign terrorists from coming here .
Third , discover and disrupt plots before they can be carried out .
Fourth , support law enforcement officers who risk their lives to prevent and respond to attacks .
And fifth , empower our Muslim-American communities , who are on the front-lines of the fight against radicalization .
This is a 360-degree strategy to keep America safe , and I want to walk through each of the elements , from recruitment to training to planning to execution .
First , shutting down recruitment . We have to stop jihadists from radicalizing new recruits in-person and through social media , chat rooms , and what 's called the dark web .
To do that , we need stronger relationships between Washington , Silicon Valley , and all of our great tech companies and entrepreneurs .
American innovation is a powerful force , and we have to put it to work defeating ISIS .
That starts with understanding where and how recruitment happens . Our security professionals need to more effectively track and analyze ISIS 's social media posts and map jihadist networks , and they need help from the tech community .
Companies should redouble their efforts to maintain and enforce their own service agreements and other necessary policies to police their networks , identifying extremist content and removing it .
Now , many are already doing this , and sharing those best practices more widely is important .
At the State Department , I started an interagency center to combat violent jihadist messages , to have a better way to communicate on behalf of our values , and to give young people drawn to those messages an alternative narrative .
We recruited specialists fluent in Arabic , Urdu , and Somali to wave online battles with extremists to counter their propaganda .
Now , those efforts have not kept pace with the threat , so we need to step up our game , in partnership with the private sector and credible moderate voices outside government .
But that 's just some of what we have to do .
Experts from the FBI , the intelligence community , Homeland Security , DoD , the State Department , and the technology industry should work together to develop a unified national strategy to defeat ISIS in cyberspace , using all of our capabilities to deny jihadists virtual territory , just as we work to deny them actual territory .
And at the same time , we also have to do more to address the challenge of radicalization , whatever form it takes .
It 's imperative that the Saudis , the Qataris , the Kuwaitis and others stop their citizens from supporting radical schools , madrassas and mosques around the world , once and for all , and that should be the top priority in all of our discussions with these countries .
Now , second , we have to prevent ISIS recruits from training abroad , and prevent foreign jihadists from coming here .
Most urgent is stemming the flow of fighters from Europe and America to Iraq and Syria , and then back home again .
The United States and our allies need to know the identities of every fighter who makes that trip , and then share information with each other in real time .
Right now , European nations don't always alert each other when they turn away a suspected extremist at the border or when a passport is stolen .
They have to dramatically improve intelligence sharing and counterterrorism cooperation .
And we 're ready to help them do that . We also need to take down the network of enablers who help jihadists finance and facilitate their travel , forge documents , and evade detection .
And the United States and our allies should commit to revoke the passports and visas of jihadists who have gone to join ISIS or other groups , and bring the full force of law against them .
As I 've said before , the United States has to take a close look at our visa programs .
And I am glad the administration and Congress are stepping up scrutiny in the wake of San Bernardino .
And that should include scrutinizing applicants ' social media postings .
We also should dispatch more Homeland Security agents to high-risk countries to better investigate visa applicants .
For many years , America has waived visa requirements for travelers from countries with reliable security procedures , including key allies in Europe and Asia .
That makes sense . But we also have to be smart .
Except for limited exceptions like diplomats and aid workers , anyone who has traveled in the past five years to a country facing serious problems with terrorism and foreign fighters should have to go through a full visa investigation , no matter where they 're from .
We also have to be vigilant in screening and vetting refugees from Syria , guided by the best judgment of our security and diplomatic professionals .
Rigorous vetting already takes place while these refugees are still overseas , and it 's a process that historically takes 18 to 24 months .
But Congress needs to provide enough resources to ensure we have sufficient personnel deployed to run the most thorough possible process .
And just as important , we cannot allow terrorists to intimidate us into abandoning our values and our humanitarian obligations .
Turning away orphans , applying a religious test that discriminates against Muslims , slamming the door on every single Syrian refugee ; that is not who we are .
We are better than that . It would be a cruel irony indeed if ISIS can force families from their homes and then also prevent them from finding new ones .
So after rigorous screening , we should welcome families fleeing Syria just as the Twin Cities and this state have welcomed previous generations of refugees , exiles , and immigrants .
Of course , the key is to prevent terrorists also from exploiting our compassion and endangering our security .
But we can do this . And I think we must .
Third , we have to discover and disrupt jihadist plots before they can be carried out .
This is going to take better intelligence collection , analysis , and sharing .
I 've proposed an intelligence surge against ISIS that includes more operations officers and linguists , enhancing our technical surveillance of overseas targets , intercepting terrorist communications , flying more reconnaissance missions to track terrorists ' movements , and developing even closer partnerships with other intelligence services .
President Obama recently signed the USA Freedom Act , which was passed by a bipartisan majority in Congress .
It protects civil liberties while maintaining capabilities that our intelligence and law enforcement agencies need to keep us safe .
However , the new law is now under attack from presidential candidates on the left and right .
Some would strip away crucial counterterrorism tools , even with appropriate judicial and congressional oversight .
Others seem eager to go back to discredited practices of the past .
I don't think we can afford to let either view prevail .
Now , encryption of mobile devices and communications does present a particularly tough problem with important implications for security and civil liberties .
Law enforcement and counterterrorism professionals warn that impenetrable encryption may make it harder for them to investigate plots and prevent future attacks .
On the other hand , there are very legitimate worries about privacy , network security , and creating new vulnerabilities that bad actors can exploit .
I know there 's no magic fix to this dilemma that will satisfy all these concerns .
But we can't just throw up our hands . The tech community and the government have to stop seeing each other as adversaries and start working together to keep us safe from terrorists .
And even as we make sure law enforcement officials get the tools they need to prevent attacks , it 's essential that we also make sure jihadists don't get the tools they need to carry out attacks .
It defies common sense that Republicans in Congress refuse to make it harder for potential terrorists to buy guns .
If you 're too dangerous to fly , you 're too dangerous to buy a gun , period .
And we should insist on comprehensive background checks and close loopholes that allow potential terrorists to buy weapons online or at gun shows .
And I think it 's time to restore the ban on assault weapons and high capacity magazines .
I know this will drive some of our Republican friends a little crazy .
You 'll probably hear it tonight . They will say that guns are a totally separate issue , nothing to do with terrorism .
Well , I have news for them , terrorists use guns to kill Americans .
And I think we should make it a lot harder for them from to do that ever again .
And there 's a question , a question they should be asked : Why don't the Republican candidates want to do that ?
You see , I have this old fashioned idea that we elect a president in part , in large part , to keep us safe , from terrorists , from gun violence , from whatever threatens our families and communities .
And I 'm not going to let the gun lobby or anyone else tell me that 's not the right path for us to go down .
Now , the fourth element in my strategy is supporting law enforcement officers who risk their lives to prevent and respond to terrorist attacks .
In San Bernardino , city , county , state , and federal authorities acted with speed and courage to prevent even more loss of life .
Like Detective Jorge Lozano , a 15-year police veteran , who assured terrified civilians , I 'll take a bullet before you do .
There is no limit to the gratitude we owe to law enforcement professionals like that Detective Lozano who run toward danger to try to save lives .
And not just in the immediate wake of an attack .
Our police , firefighters , and emergency responders will keep putting their lives on the line long after the cameras move on .
It 's disgraceful that Congress has thus far failed to keep faith with first responders suffering from the lasting health effects of 9/11 .
Many of them were men and women I was so proud to represent as a Senator from New York .
The Zadroga 9/11 Health Act never should have been allowed to lapse .
It looks like Majority Leader Mitch McConnell may have finally dropped his opposition .
And I hope the American people will hold him to that .
And we will continue to honor the service and sacrifice of those who responded to the worst terrorist attack in our history .
We have to make sure that local law enforcement has the resources and training they need to keep us safe .
And they should be more closely synced up with national counterterrorism experts , including with better use of fusion centers that serve as clearinghouses for intelligence and coordination .
And we need to strengthen our defenses and our resilience wherever we 're vulnerable , whether it 's soft targets like shopping malls or higher-profile targets like airports , railways , or power plants .
We have to build on the progress of the Obama Administration in locking down loose nuclear materials , and other WMD , so they never fall into the hands of terrorists who seek them actively around the world .
So we should be providing the Department of Homeland Security with the resources it needs to stay one step ahead , not trying to privatize key functions , like TSA , as some Republicans have proposed .
And it 's important for us to recognize that when we talk about law enforcement , we have made progress in being sure that our federal authorities share information with our state and local authorities , but that was an issue I tackled after 9/11 , and we have to stay really vigilant so that information is in the hands where it needs to be .
Finally , the fifth element in the strategy is empowering Muslim-American communities who are on the front-lines of the fight against radicalization .
There are millions of peace-loving Muslims living , working , raising families , and paying taxes in our country .
These Americans may be our first , last , and best defense against home grown radicalization and terrorism .
They are the most likely to recognize the insidious effects of radicalization before it 's too late , intervene to help set a young person straight .
They are the best positioned to block anything going forward .
That 's why law enforcement has worked so hard since 9/11 to build up trust and strong relationships within Muslim-American communities .
Here in the Twin Cities , you have an innovative partnership that brings together parents , teachers , imams , and others in the Somali-American community with law enforcement , non-profits , local businesses , mental health professionals and others to intervene with young people who are at risk .
It 's called the Building Community Resilience Pilot Program , and it deserves increased support .
It has not gotten the financial resources that it needs to do everything the people involved in it know they can do .
And we 've got to do a better job of supporting it .
Now I know that like many places across the country , there 's more work to do to increase trust between communities and law enforcement .
Just last month , I know here a young African American man was fatally shot by a police officer .
And I understand an investigation is underway . Whatever the outcome , tragedies like this raise hard questions about racial justice in America and put at risk efforts to build the community relationships that help keep us safe from crime and from terrorism .
When people see that respect and trust are two-way streets , they 're more likely to work hand-in-hand with law enforcement .
One of the mothers of the 10 men recently charged with conspiring with terrorists said , We have to stop the denial ,
she told other parents that . We have to talk to our kids and work with the FBI .
That 's a message we need to hear from leaders within Muslim-American communities across our country .
But we also want to highlight the successes in Muslim American communities , and there are so many of them .
I just met with the first Somali-American council member of the City Council here .
And he was proudly telling me how much change Somali immigrants , now Muslim-Americans have made in parts of the city and neighborhoods that had been pretty much hollowed out .
Let 's look at the successes . If we 're going to fully integrate everyone into America , then we need to be seeing all their contributions , too .
And that is one of the many reasons why we must all stand up against offensive , inflammatory , hateful , anti-Muslim rhetoric .
You know , not only do these comments cut against everything we stand for as Americans , they are also dangerous .
As the Director of the FBI told Congress recently , anything that erodes trust with Muslim-Americans makes the job of law enforcement more difficult .
We need every community invested in this fight , not alienated and sitting on the sidelines .
One of the community leaders I met with told me that a lot of the children in the community are now afraid to go to school .
They 're not only afraid of being perceived as a threat , they are afraid of being threatened because of who they are .
This is such a open-hearted and generous community , I hope there will be even more efforts perhaps under the aegis of the university and certainly Governor Dayton and others , to bring people together to reassure members of the community , particularly children and teenagers that they are welcome , invited , and valued here in this city and state .
Now Donald Trump 's proposal to ban all Muslims from entering the United States has rightly sparked outrage across our country and around the world .
Even some of the other Republican candidates are saying he 's gone too far .
But the truth is , many of those same candidates have also said disgraceful things about Muslims .
And this kind of divisive rhetoric actually plays into the hands of terrorists .
It alienates partners and undermines moderates we need around the world in the fight against ISIS .
You know , you hear a lot of talk from some of the other candidates about coalitions .
Everyone seems to want one . But there 's not nearly as much talk about what it actually takes to build a coalition and make it work .
I know how hard this is because I 've done it .
And I can tell you , insulting potential allies doesn't make it any easier .
And demonizing Muslims also feeds a narrative that jihadists use to recruit new followers around the world , that the United States is at war with Islam .
As both the Pentagon and the FBI have said in the past week , we cannot in any way lend credence to that twisted idea .
This is not a clash of civilizations . It 's a clash between civilization and barbarism and that 's how it must be seen and fought .
Some will tell you that our open society is a vulnerability in the struggle against terrorism .
I disagree . I believe our tolerance and diversity are at the core of our strength .
At a naturalization ceremony for new citizens today in Washington , President Obama noted the tension throughout our history between welcoming or rejecting the stranger .
It is , he said , about the meaning of America , what kind of country do we want to be ?
And it 's about the capacity of each generation to honor the creed as old as our founding ,
E Pluribus Unum . Out of many we are one .
President Obama is right , and it matters . It 's no coincidence that American Muslims have long been better integrated and less susceptible to radicalization than Muslims in less welcoming countries .
We can't give in to demagogues who play on our basest instincts .
We must instead rely on the principles written into our American DNA . Freedom .
Equality . Opportunity . America is strongest when all our people believe they have a stake in our country and our future , no matter where they 're from , what they look like , how they worship , or who they love .
Our country was founded by people fleeing religious persecution . As George Washington put it , the United States gives
to bigotry no sanction , to persecution no assistance .
So to all our Muslim-American brothers and sisters , this is your country too .
And I am proud to be your fellow American . And I want to remind us , particularly our Republican friends , that George W . Bush was right .
Six days after 9/11 he went to a Muslim community center and here 's what he said , those who feel like they can intimidate our fellow citizens to take their anger don't represent the best of America , they represent the worst of human kind , and they should be ashamed of that kind of behavior .
So if you want to see the best of America , you need look no further than Army Captain Humayun Khan .
He was born in the United Arab Emirates . He moved to Maryland as a small child , and later graduated from the University of Virginia , before enlisting in the U.S. Army .
In June 2004 , he was serving in Iraq . One day , while his infantry unit was guarding the gates of their base , a suspicious vehicle appeared .
Captain Khan told his troops to get back , but he went forward .
He took ten steps toward the car before it exploded .
Captain Khan was killed , but his unit was saved by his courageous acts .
Captain Khan was posthumously awarded the Bronze Star and Purple Heart .
He was just 27 years old . We still wonder what made him take those 10 steps , Khan 's father said in a recent interview .
Maybe that 's the point , he went on , where all the values , all the service to country , all the things he learned in this country kicked in .
It was those values that made him take those 10 steps .
Those 10 steps told us we did not make a mistake in moving to this country , his father finished .
As hard as this is , it 's time to move from fear to resolve .
It 's time to stand up and say , We are Americans . '
We are the greatest nation on earth not in spite of the challenges we 've faced , but because of them .
Americans will not buckle or break . We will not turn on each other or turn on our principles .
We will pursue our enemies with unyielding power and purpose .
We will crush their would-be caliphate and counter radical jihadism wherever it takes root .
We 're in it for the long haul . And we 'll stand taller and stronger than they can possibly imagine .
That 's what we do here . It 's who we are .
That 's how we 'll win , by looking at one another with respect , with concern , with commitment .
That 's the America that I know makes us all so proud to be a part of .
Thank you all very much . During remarks in Fairfield , Iowa , Hillary Clinton promoted her new plan to make a groundbreaking $2 billion annual commitment for preventing , effectively treating , and making a cure possible for Alzheimer 's disease by 2025 .
Alzheimer 's is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States and is the only cause in the top ten ten we cannot currently prevent , cure , or slow down .
Thank you ! Thank you very , very much . Thank you , that really means a lot to me .
It 's wonderful to be here and I 'm especially grateful that Tom and Christie are with me and I thank her for sharing her story about her stepmom .
I see there are some other stories represented here with the little signs , End Alzheimer 's . '
And I am so pleased to be able to talk for a few minutes about what I think we can do as a nation and then to answer any questions on any issue that you might have .
And I want to give a shout out to the overflow room in the auditorium .
I stopped by to thank them and I think they can hear , so I 'm glad that they can be part of this and I asked my staff in there that if they have any questions as we get to the question-and-answer , they can run in a question , too , so that they can be part of the Town Hall .
And I want to thank Mayor Malloy , thank you so much for being here with us and thank you for everything you have done to make your town so sustainable .
And I loved seeing the sign about green building materials , shop here and all of that .
That 's a really important achievement . It is a few days before Christmas .
And if you 're anything like me , you probably have a lot to do .
I sure do , but I 'm delighted to be here on my 20th visit to Iowa as we end this year .
And it 's been incredibly fulfilling and meaningful to me , in part because what I 've tried to do for the whole beginning into the middle of the campaign was actually listen to people and hear what was on your minds , because I wanted to be sure that what I was thinking about , what I would be proposing in this campaign was not only about the big issues how do we get the economy to work for everybody , not just those on the top , how do we make our country and the world safer , promoting peace , dealing with the dangers and threats that are posed by global terrorism .
How do we really come to grips with so many of the challenges that we have ?
But as Christie said , I have been so moved by what Iowans have told me from my very first trip until today .
I was in Keota earlier today and we were doing a Town Hall , people were asking about college , about guns , and then I called on a little girl and she stood up and she said , can you do anything about bullying ?
And I looked at her and I could tell that this was not just an abstract question .
And I said to her , well , is there something that you want to say more about this ?
And she said , yes , I have asthma and kids make fun of me and they act like it 's catching .
It 's not catching . And , oh my goodness , I just put my arms around her and I thought ,
That 's what keeps her and her family up at night .
And so how do we , as a nation , begin once again to try to help people deal with the challenges that every one of us have .
And so I 'm here to talk about something really important and I want to start with a question : How many of you have firsthand experience with Alzheimer 's Disease ?
Well , that 's not surprising . We have five million people who have been diagnosed .
We know there are more who haven't been diagnosed or have been diagnosed incorrectly .
And we know the number is only going to increase so that there will be many , many more families and hands that will come up in years to come .
And so my goal today is to really relate what I 've heard from so many families that are taking care of a loved one with Alzheimer 's , who tell me , as you heard from Christie , all the things they do to try to deal with the disease .
Like removing the knobs on the stove so that Mom can't start a fire or maybe sleeping on the floor outside Dad 's bedroom so that he can't get out when he feels compelled to try to escape .
Or leaving notes for your wife to remind her where she is and what day it is .
Being grateful for all the good days and wanting so badly to give the best care that you can .
Even with professional caregivers , this is a continuing burden financially and emotionally .
And if you have a job , you can't afford in many instances to have someone come and stay for the amount of time that your job may consume , but you don't really have a choice .
I met a young man in New Hampshire , Keith , who told me that his Mom has Alzheimer 's .
She 's 84 and he takes care of her . But he 's a public school teacher .
And he told me , She took care of five children and she took care of my Dad and she took care of my grandmother and now it 's my turn to take care of her .
But on a teacher 's salary , he can't afford to pay someone to watch her while he 's at work .
He can't afford an adult day program . So he brings his mom to work with him .
And he 's just praying that she will be able to continue to manage that experience every day , because he doesn't know what happens next .
I 've said many times that I 'm running for president to deal with the big problems but also with these problems that keep families up at night .
And this is one that really fits into the category , along with others that I 've heard Iowans talk to me about : untreated mental health , untreated substance abuse , the rising cost of prescription there 's so much that people are facing .
So here 's what I have become convinced of , that there is more that we can be doing to deal with Alzheimer 's .
Consider this : Alzheimer 's is the sixth leading cause of death right now in our country .
For every other of the Top 10 causes of death , we have treatments , we have means of prevention we even have some cures .
But for Alzheimer 's , we have no treatment , no prevention and no cure .
Alzheimer 's is also one of the most expensive diseases in America .
All told , it and related dementia drain more than $200 billion from our economy every year .
I believe we should take a fraction of that and put it toward research .
I become convinced of this when I was a senator and I co-chaired the Congressional Task Force on Alzheimer 's .
I talked to a lot of doctors and scientists about what it would take to rapidly accelerate progress toward a breakthrough .
They all said the same thing : we need more research dollars , we need reliable streams of funding , so we can follow promising leads even if they take a few years to pay off .
And we need more brilliant minds working on this . And if we do all of that , we have a shot at making extraordinary progress .
So here is what I am proposing that I will do as president , because I think we 're have to set some goals if we 're going to try to confront this disease .
First , I 'll set a goal of finding ways to prevent and effectively treat Alzheimer'sand make a cure possible by the year 2025 .
That 's 10 years away . Leading scientists and researchers and clinicians tell me this is achievable , if we reach for it .
So that 's what I intend to do . How ?
Well secondly , I 'll invest $2 billion every year into research for Alzheimer 's and related disorders .
Last year , we invested just over $500 million for a disease that costs many , many times more than that .
Now just last week , Congress agreed to add another $350 million in research money .
And that 's a great step in the right direction , but we need to go further .
Third , I 'll ensure a reliable stream of funding between now and 2025 , so researchers can chase big ideas without worrying that their funding will disappear in a year .
That 's what happened when the Congress adopted what they call sequestration , where they stopped spending below a certain level indiscriminately .
Good things were stopped as well as unproductive things that should have been stopped , perhaps .
And many researchers had to stop their research . Fourth , I 'll appoint a top-flight of researchers and health experts as a team to see this through , because it 's going to take basic research , drug development , public-private partnerships , recruiting participants for clinical trials and we need people who know how to do this with a project of this size and scale .
I think if we make some breakthroughs , we 're going to have a very broad impact .
Two of every three Alzheimer 's patients are women . Why ?
We need to find out . African Americans and Latinos are more likely to get it than whites .
Why ? We need to find out . Plus , research into Alzheimer 's will help us fight a range of neurodegenerative diseases , including Parkinson 's .
We can get pay off on this in ways that right now we can't even imagine .
At the same time , while we accelerate research we should give more help to the caregivers who are doing everything they can to help their loved ones .
I want to give tax relief to family members who are caring for ailing parents and grandparents .
I think if you are doing that work and we know that many families spend down their savings trying to do it you deserve some help .
Secondly I 've already announced that I want to give tax relief to family members who are caring for ailing parents and grandparents and I want the hard work of those family caregivers to count toward Social Security .
What happens now , and it 's particularly affecting women : if you drop out of the workforce to care for a loved one and you lose that income , that lowers your Social Security payment because the average of your income that you 've earned is the basis for Social Security .
I think caregiving is really hard work and the labor should count toward your Social Security benefits once you retire , just like any other job .
And we also have to make sure that paid caregivers , the home care workers who come into your home have enough training and sufficient financial support so that they they 're not turning over all the time .
Just when you get used to somebody , they can't afford to do the work any longer .
I 'll also fight for Medicare to cover a comprehensive care-planning session for patients and families , following every single diagnosis of Alzheimer 's or related dementia , because what I 've heard from families is you get that diagnosis and then you 're sent home without any support , oftentimes not really knowing what to expect .
And I think that is just a terrible mistake . We need to help families so that when they do face this , they have some guidance about the right choices .
I 'll work with Congress to reauthorize the Missing Alzheimer 's Disease Patient Alert Program ; that helps people find Alzheimer 's patients who go wandering , and it 's been a godsend to families .
And I think it 's important that it be a continuing godsend , so we want to get that reauthorized .
And then I want to make sure that every Medicare recipient knows they 're entitled to annual cognitive screenings and that is something that , if we earlier diagnose , even if we can't cure , the more we will know about how to help you and help your family deal with this .
So for me , the bottom line is if we 're the kind of nation that cares for its citizens and supports families , respects our elders and takes care of our neighbors , then we 've got work to do .
And we need to do it better when it comes to diseases like Alzheimer 's .
It means the world to have so many families trust me with their stories .
You know , it 's an odd thing when you run for office and particularly when you run for President and you are out there meeting people and sometimes you meet them for a minute or five or 10 , sometimes you have longer to sit and talk with them .
And so often they will tell you things that they preface by saying , I 've never talked to anybody else about this , but '
And then they will tell me about what 's happening in their family with Alzheimer 's or what 's happening with some other challenge .
I think we need to be listening to one another and supporting one another .
This campaign , particularly coming from the other side of the aisle with the Republican candidates , has gotten mean-spirited .
And the rhetoric has been hateful towards so many people .
We are better than that and we need to stand up and demonstrate it all the time .
Thank you . Thank you . Thank you all . Hard Hats for Hillary is the coalition to organize the millions of working families in construction , building , transportation and other labor industries and professions to support Hillary 's agenda .
Thank you . Wow . Thank you all so much .
Thank you . Thank you . This is an amazing event in so many ways , and I can't tell you how pleased and proud I am to have the endorsement and support of your fabulous mayor , Marty Walsh .
Thank you . I think Terry O'Sullivan got us all off on the right foot with that energetic , powerful introduction .
And I appreciate Terry talking about Marty 's upbringing , and I especially am pleased that Marty 's mother is here , because I want to pay honor to Marty and his family immigrant families who came to this country and made a great contribution .
I want to acknowledge Congresswoman Katherine Clark . Thank you so much for being here .
The members of the city council , state legislature , and other elected officials .
In addition to Terry , I see in the crowd and I hope I don't miss anybody Ken Rigmaiden , general president , International Union of Painters and Allied Trades ; Doug McCarron , general president , United Brotherhood of Carpenters ; Eric Dean , general president , Laborers ' International Union of North America ; and Sean McGarvey , president of the North America 's Building Trades Unions ; and many other labor leaders .
Oh , my goodness . The mayor just told me that Michael Dukakis Governor Dukakis is here .
Yay ! Thank you . Thank you so much , Michael .
And Kitty , thank you very much for being here .
This afternoon just gets better and better . Marty has been fighting for working folks for a long time , ever since he joined Laborers Local 223 .
And all that time , he wasn't just thinking about his own future ; he was thinking about how to help others climb the ladder to a middle-class life .
That 's what used to make this country work so well .
There were lots of ladders , and people were often given a boost to get on the first rung .
Now there are those who have torn those ladders down , who have left them in disrepair , and are fighting us from putting them back up .
Well , I 'll tell you one thing : As your president , we 're going to have ladders of opportunity available for anybody willing to work hard and do your part to make a difference in this country .
Another reason I want to thank Marty is because he believes in apprenticeships .
How many of you have been apprentices ? How many here ?
Well , he started an innovative program called Building Pathways that has helped more than 100 women and people of color prepare to enter the skill-building trades .
And it 's the kind of creative caring that I really value when I look at Mayor Walsh , similar to what my longtime friend , the late Tom Menino , also did in this city people who really care about building the city and the people in it .
Boston just won a new grant from the Department of Labor to expand apprenticeships even further .
That means more talented , hardworking people can get their start in the building trades .
So Marty 's leading on a lot of important fronts .
But here 's what 's really important about this mayor : Marty Walsh gets it .
He knows what it 's like to get knocked down , but he refused to be knocked out .
And I want everybody who 's had hard times , who 's faced obstacles and difficulties and , frankly , I 'd be surprised if there was one person here who couldn't say that that had happened to them in life . Because we all do .
But what 's important is not whether you get knocked down ; what 's important is whether you get back up , and you keep going .
And I 'll tell you , that 's not only true personally , that 's true professionally .
There are a lot of folks here who know that the construction trades were hit hard by the Great Recession .
A lot of people lost their jobs ; some saw their retirement savings , their kids ' college funds wiped out ; some even lost their homes .
But again , even though people got knocked down , they refused to be knocked out .
Folks kept doing everything they could to keep working . Families tightened their belts .
People believed in themselves , and in our country . And now , thanks to your hard work and sacrifice , we 're back on our feet .
We 've had 68 straight months of job growth , created more than 13 million new jobs .
Manufacturing is coming back . The auto industry which was on the brink of collapse is thriving .
And a lot of that is thanks to having a Democrat in the White House because when we have a Democrat , the economy does better .
I know my Republican friends hate me to say this , but this is a fact : Our economy does better when we have a Democrat in the White House .
In fact , if you go back , you can see unemployment is lower , incomes are rising .
And did you know we are four times more likely to have a recession with a Republican in the White House ?
So I know this is going to be a hard campaign , but I want you to take those little factoids and start spreading them around .
Anybody who says , Well , I don't know ,
I mean , think about in the last 35 years we 've had five presidents : three Republicans and two Democrats .
I think it 's fair to say each of the Democrats inherited economic problems from their Republican predecessors .
I know both of those Democrats ; I 'm well aware that they did .
I know when my husband got in , there was a recession , and the debt of the country had been quadrupled in the prior 12 years .
And I remember , shortly after he got elected , him saying to me ,
It is so much worse than they told us .
And then somebody asked him one day , Well , what is it you think you bring to Washington ?
And he thought for a minute , did that sort of Bill Clinton thing where he chews on the inside of his cheek , you know ?
And then he said , Probably arithmetic . So he started adding it up , and by the end of eight years we had 23 million new jobs .
Incomes rose for everybody , not just at the top in the middle , working folks , poor people .
More poor people lifted out of poverty than in recent history .
And then we had a balanced budget and a surplus .
And so I thought I went to the Senate , thanks to the good people of New York hey , we are on the right track .
But no , that 's not what the Republicans believe .
So once again , it was back to trickle-down economics : cut taxes on the wealthy ; get out of the way of corporations , let them do pretty much whatever they want .
And you saw what happened . So after that ' 08 election , President-elect Obama called me , asked me to come to Chicago to see him .
I didn't know why . Turns out he wanted to ask me to be secretary of state but , before we got to that , he says to me ,
It 's so much worse than they told us .
I said , Mr. president-elect , I 've heard that before .
And it was . We were losing 800,000 jobs a month .
Now , the Republicans want us all to forget that while they sing the song of returning to trickle-down economics .
But we 're not going to let them forget that .
We are going to remind them every single day of this campaign .
Because by the time their economic policies had run the course , nine million Americans had lost their jobs , five million lost their homes , and $13 trillion in family wealth disappeared .
So although we have made progress , we are standing but we are not yet running .
My job as your president will be to do everything I can to create more good-paying jobs , to get wages rising again for American workers and families .
Because Americans have not had a raise , and it 's time we get back to where we were before the Republicans came in and messed it up again .
Now , I don't need to tell you that the cost of everything from childcare to college to health care is going up faster than wages .
And too many young people are being crushed by student debt .
It 's making it hard for them to buy a house or start a business or even to get married , they tell me .
I 'm the only Democratic candidate in this race who will pledge to raise your incomes , not your taxes .
I will do everything I can to make it easier to pay for childcare , to send your kids to college , take care of aging parents , afford prescription drugs .
Those should not be luxuries not in the United States of America .
So as I look at what we need to create more good-paying jobs , I know that we need jobs that are going to really give people a middle-class lifestyle .
My jobs plan starts with investing in infrastructure . Not just because infrastructure jobs are good-paying jobs though they are and not just because we desperately need to invest in building our future again though we do but because investing in infrastructure makes our economy more productive and competitive across the board .
It cuts costs for families and businesses . It spurs more private investment .
It boosts wages up and down the supply chain and throughout the economy .
So to build a strong economy for our future , we must start by building strong infrastructure today , and putting you and your members to work .
And I don't have to tell you what a sorry state we 're in .
Our roads and bridges are potholed and crumbling . Families endure blackouts because our electric grid fails in extreme weather .
Beneath our cities , our pipeline infrastructure our water , our sewer , you name it is up to a century , or more , old .
Our airports are a mess . Our ports need improvement .
Our rail systems do as well . Now , here in Boston , I remember the historic snowfall you had last winter .
Honest to goodness , it just crippled the city . In the pictures , I saw two-story snow drifts .
It crippled the T , I remember hearing that . Now , you have tracks and trains that you 're hurrying to try to repair , and I know the mayor and his team are working overtime on that .
The endless delays mean people can't count on the T to get to work .
They can't move around the city as easily as before .
Not everybody can afford or even wants to have a car these days .
And I don't think people want to see more traffic downtown .
That 's why public transit is absolutely vital to connecting people , especially students and low-income people and people of color .
I have a five-year , $275 billion plan to invest in our infrastructure , create good-paying jobs , and build the future America deserves .
This would be on top of what the Congress should finally get around to authorizing .
This is a down payment on our future . I also include creating a new national infrastructure bank .
We 've talked about this ; now is the time to do it .
It would support up to $250 billion in additional investment for projects of regional and national importance , and leverage money from states , cities and the private sector .
We know there is money sitting on the sidelines that could be put to productive use by helping us build our future , and many of your own pension funds have asked to support more infrastructure investment .
The national infrastructure bank will help us organize those kinds of investments .
And I want to bring back Build America bonds . That was a successful Recovery Act program that helped states and cities borrow the money they needed to invest in infrastructure at lower cost .
Build America bonds saved taxpayers ' money , made government more efficient , and supported projects from upgrading water infrastructure in Chicago to building a new convention center in Nashville .
I want to use every tool we can to invest in infrastructure and build a stronger , more prosperous future .
Now , sometimes people say , Well , yeah ,
yeah , we 'll get around to it . We don't have time .
We 've got to do this now . We need to put people to work now .
For example , for years the best airports in the world have been in places like China , Korea and Japan .
There isn't one U.S. airport in the top 10 , or even in the top 20 .
Cincinnati Airport sneaks onto the list at number 30 . Meanwhile , parts of our air traffic control system date to World War II . We invented airplanes here in America ; we are the reason the world can fly I think we can do better than we 're doing now to make sure to keep ahead .
We also invented the internet , believe it or not .
We did . And 35 percent of our schools don't have fiber optic connections for high-speed broadband .
17 percent of our people don't have access to high-speed broadband .
China is investing $180 billion to expand broadband . We cannot be left behind .
By 2020 , I want 100 percent of American households to have access to quality , affordable , high-speed internet .
Back starting in the 1930s , we electrified the entire country but today our grid is a mess .
Towns in New England shouldn't sit through blackouts because of snowstorms , and towns in the Southwest shouldn't have brownouts because of heat waves .
And our electric grid is vulnerable to both extreme weather and cyber attacks .
Yet we have that we invented here smart grid technologies that will help save families and businesses money , But we are not deploying them fast enough or far enough .
That 's why I have a comprehensive plan to modernize our electric grid and our energy system from coast to coast .
Investing in infrastructure is about connecting people to their jobs and families , and it also means powering America .
That 's why I also have a national plan to make sure we have an energy system from one end of our country to the other , using all of our energy potential and that 's going to take a lot of hard work to build , maintain , and put online .
So this is part of what we have to do to be competitive .
I know that it 's something we 've been trying to do , and I know that Congress has stood in the way .
I 'm hoping they finally come together on the highway transportation bill , something they have been fighting about now for several years .
But as I say , that is just the floor .
Yeah , we need them to do that . It 's important that they finally agree .
But we have to build on that . We are trillions of dollars behind .
So we have to add to what the Congress appropriates : On top of that , create the national infrastructure bank , and then we are off and running .
But in order to build a strong , competitive infrastructure , we need a strong workforce .
And I want to thank all the trades unions who are here today , because even during the midst of the Great Recession , when things got tough , you never stopped investing in your workforce .
You kept bringing in apprentices . You kept training your members on the latest tools and techniques .
I 've been to some of those really impressive apprenticeship facilities .
Doug , when I toured the carpenters ' training facility I was so impressed .
And Ken , I was honored to visit the painters ' training facility , and to earn your endorsement there .
And I look forward to visiting more training facilities as this campaign goes on .
Because I want to draw the press 's attention to what you all do to prepare the workforce of tomorrow .
And I want to support you to do even more .
You 've been doing your part . Now , as president , I want to do mine .
I 'll fight for a new tax credit to encourage more high-quality apprenticeship programs .
I 'll always have your backs on this , because the jobs I 'm talking about are tough jobs sometimes even dangerous jobs .
They take training and skill and respect for workers ' safety .
They take trust between workers and contractors . And I 'm not going to let anybody undermine collective bargaining rights or prevailing wage standards or project labor agreements .
I 'm going to do everything I can so that in the 21st century , careers in the building trades are that ladder into the middle-class life that everybody working hard deserves .
And I 'm also going to make sure that the federal government is a good partner for cities like Boston , and mayors like Marty .
You 're finding innovative ways to create jobs and build economic opportunity .
And the federal government , as Marty was saying , should do everything we can to be your partner , to back you up .
Now , when I was in the Senate , we didn't have any trouble agreeing with our Republican colleagues that investing in infrastructure was a good idea .
It was good for the economy , it was good for our communities , it was good for national security , so that 's why we passed a bipartisan highway bill .
And we put money into roads and bridges and bike paths and transit .
We put money into all kinds of things that made it possible for us to build out our economy .
But the Republicans have been throwing up roadblocks , and for the life of me I don't understand it .
I feel that there 's got to be something missing in their appreciation for what it takes to keep our economy growing , and to make it possible for more people to enjoy the benefits of that growing economy .
I 'm going to do everything I can to call for the passage of that long-term highway bill , and I 'm calling on every Republican running for president to call their friends in Congress to get on board for the good of the country .
Let 's get that passed before the end of the year .
Let 's end the unpredictability , and all the projects that are out there waiting to be funded .
So I 'm ready to take this case to the American people , but I need your help .
I love seeing all the T-shirts . And as I go from event to event across the country , I hope we have a lot of T-shirts , and a lot of people from the trades standing there with me , making the case that what I 'm advocating for is common sense .
It really will make a difference in our economy , and in the lives of millions of American families .
I know Marty is ready . I know the hard hats are ready .
We need to make a case for investment and then win the election , so we can actually get to work and put it into practice .
Now , let me say that I think we have to think big again as Americans if we 're going to do big things .
I look at a lot of what 's going on in our politics today and it seems mean-spirited , it seems small-minded , it seems negative .
I want us to be ready for the future , but more than that , I want us to shape the future .
I want our cities to be in the forefront of cities anywhere in the world .
I want our workers to be the most competitive and productive in the world .
I want us once again to think big and look up beyond the horizon about what 's possible in America .
I know we can do this . I know it 's not going to be easy .
This is not my first rodeo . But I will tell you this .
I had such a great Thanksgiving with my new granddaughter .
Yeah , it was pretty amazing . I thought a lot about her future .
That 's kind of what gets me up and keeps me going , even on the not-so-good days .
My grandfather was a factory worker . He came to this country as an immigrant a young immigrant with his family .
Went to work in the Scranton lace mills in Scranton , Pennsylvania .
He worked really hard , and he did it to support his family , but also because he really believed in the promise of America and he thought if he worked hard , his sons would have a better life .
And they did . Every one of them went to college .
And my dad got out of college in the depths of the Depression in 1935 and hopped a freight train from Scranton to Chicago , because he heard second- or third-hand there might be a job there .
And he got a job , as a salesman . And then he went into the Navy during World War II , and when he came out he was a small businessman , and he did give us a good , solid , middle-class life .
My mom had a very different upbringing . She was basically abandoned and rejected by her own parents , sent off to live with grandparents who didn't want her .
So , by the age of 14 , she was working on her own as a housemaid in somebody 's house in order to support herself .
Both of them really believed in this country , even though they had very different experiences .
And I remember asking my mother how did she survive being treated so badly ?
And she said , You know , at every turn , there was somebody who was kind to me .
I think about that a lot when I look at my granddaughter , because we 're going to do everything we can to make sure she has every opportunity available .
But that 's not enough . It really matters what kind of country she grows up in , and what kind of world is out there waiting for her .
I don't think you should have to be the granddaughter of a former president to have all the opportunities that America can offer .
You should be able to be the granddaughter of a factory worker , or the grandson of a truck driver .
And I 'm going to do everything in my power to make sure that happens .
Come with me . Let 's win this for our children and our grandchildren , and let 's make America everything we know it can be .
Thank you all . Thank you . I 'll tell you what , I have to say to President Krump if this lawyer business doesn't work out for you , I imagine there 's a church or two that might call you to the pulpit instead of to the bar .
This is the day the Lord has made , honestly .
Wow . Let us rejoice and be glad in it .
And I have to thank all of you for the great honor of participating in this anniversary tribute .
What a wonderful idea , Attorney Gray , as so many of your ideas have been over the years .
I listened very carefully as several speakers pointed out that it would be more than appropriate for Attorney Gray to receive a certain President Medal of Freedom .
Well , I 'll tell you , I 've already written the President telling him I think that 's a good idea .
And I 've already gotten the congresswoman to agree that when she goes to the Christmas party at the White House , she 's going to raise that not just with the President , but importantly , with Mrs. Obama .
It is such an honor to be here , and I want to thank everyone for this invitation and I particularly want to recognize a few people who are with us , starting with your congresswoman , whom I have had the great privilege of getting to know and working with and looking forward to be a partner with her .
I want to acknowledge Mayor Strange . Thank you for having us here in your city .
And Chairman Dean of the Montgomery County Commission , thank you .
Mayor Ford of Tuskegee , thank you so much . I also want to thank Reverend Handy for opening up this historic church to us today .
And I had a chance to visit with Reverend and Mrs. Handy , and indeed , he was called to this church , and I am looking forward to working to support the kind of mentoring and outreach programs that he is putting in place here .
We need more of that for more of our children .
And I am so pleased that Paulette Brown could be with us today .
Those of us who know of her career and her rise , first through the NBA , then through the ABA , really hold her in such high esteem .
And I thank you for your highlighting the many women in the civil rights movement , particularly the lawyers .
Because , as Ben said , my first job out of law school was for the Children 's Defense Fund , for Marian Wright Edelman .
She was someone who I heard about when I was in law school and saw one day on the bulletin board there used to be such things in the pre-internet world called bulletin boards .
I saw where she was going to be speaking at Yale Law School , where she had graduated and where I was then a student , and I went over to hear her speak and
I was just so impressed . Here 's the first African American woman to pass the Mississippi bar , working on behalf of civil rights but focusing on the needs of children , which to me is the really overwhelming challenge that we face today .
I listened to her and then when she finished , I went up to her and I said to her I said , I 'd like to come work for you this summer .
She said , Well , that 's fine , but I can't pay you .
And I said , Well , I have to get a job because I 'm putting myself through law school , and I said to her ,
If I can figure out how to get paid , will you give me the job ?
She said , Well , that 's an offer I certainly won't refuse .
So I applied for and got a law student Civil Rights Research Council grant .
It enabled me to go to work that summer , and then when I graduated I went to work full-time , later chaired the board of the Children 's Defense Fund , and to this day I count myself very lucky having seen that little notice on that bulletin board all those years ago .
And I especially am honored to be with the Reverend Bernice King , someone whose moral clarity and call to action is certainly rooted in her father 's work , but is uniquely her own .
Her voice is one that deserves the closest attention , and I am grateful she is here with us .
When I think about a lot of the great names that we have heard today , I am always impressed and , frankly , a little humbled .
Attorney Gray is a distinguished man , but he was a very young man when he took on these cases .
It is easy now in retrospect to somehow assume that the results were foreordained , and that the time to end segregation and oppression and inequality before the law was drawing to a close .
But I don't think we should ever assume that . It took the courage of so many , and among the most courageous were the lawyers who took on the challenges in the courts and in the streets .
Another person I had the great privilege of working with was John Doar , who argued pivotal voting rights cases while serving in the Department of Justice and , memorably , had to step in between police and protesters to stop a bloodbath in Jackson in 1963 , after the murder of Medgar Evers .
I remember asking John Doar once , as I was a very young lawyer at the time of this question ,
Weren't you afraid ? Of course I was , he said , but I was representing the law .
I was representing the constitution . If we don't stand for that in the worst of times , how can we live with ourselves ?
Or think about Louis Stokes , who we just lost .
He was fighting stop and frisk back in the 1960s .
And Elaine Jones , a dear friend who defended death row inmates and helped get the death penalty abolished in 37 states as a lawyer with the NAACP legal defense fund .
I think of judges like Frank Johnson here in Alabama , who took his seat on the bench just a few weeks before Rosa Parks was arrested , and struck down the Montgomery bus segregation law as unconstitutional , then did the same for parks and restaurants , restrooms , libraries , airports , and the Alabama state police .
Or his counterpart in Louisiana Judge Skelly Wright , who overturned dozens of segregation laws there and before Brown ordered LSU to enroll black students .
These jurists , like many of the lawyers who were taking these cases , endured death threats and cross burnings .
They were reviled by many of their neighbors . They 'd walk down a street and see friends they had known since childhood who would turn their backs on them .
But they didn't back down because they too believed in the Constitution , in the rule of law .
And they knew that segregation was a distortion of justice , not an expression of it .
They also knew that sometimes , lawmakers get it wrong .
And when that happens , it 's up to lawyers and judges to make it right .
That 's what many lawyers felt then and it 's what many lawyers feel now .
Our work isn't finished . We do have to pay it forward .
There are still injustices perpetrated every day across our country , sometimes in spite of the law , sometimes , unfortunately , in keeping with it .
There are still too many Americans , especially too many African Americans , whose experience of the justice system is not what it should be .
There are still too many ways in which our laws and our policies fall short of our ideals .
So even as we celebrate all that our country has achieved in the past 60 years , we must in keeping with the legacy of those who have gone before look to the future and the work that is left to do .
We must reform our criminal justice system . It can be , and all too often is , stacked against those with the least power .
There is something profoundly wrong when African American men are still far more likely to be stopped and searched by police , charged with crimes , and sentenced to longer prison terms for doing the same things as a white man .
There is something profoundly wrong when a third of all black men face the prospect of prison during their lifetimes .
Right now an estimated 1.5 million black men are missing from their families and communities because of incarceration and premature death .
And too many black families mourn the loss of a child .
I 've met with too many mothers who have lost their children lost to senseless , incomprehensible violence .
My heart breaks for them . Many of these women are doing something quite remarkable : they are turning their grief into a powerful call to action for our nation .
We can't go on like this . We 've got to change .
We must strengthen the bonds of trust between law enforcement and the communities they serve .
In too many parts of America today , that trust has broken down .
Let 's remember that everyone benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone is respected by the law .
And as we work to deliver real reforms that can be felt in our communities , there 's a lot of good work to build on .
Across the country , many police officers are out there every day inspiring trust and confidence , honorably doing their duty , putting themselves on the line to save lives .
And many police departments are deploying creating and effective strategies , demonstrating how we can protect the public without resorting to unnecessary force .
We need to learn from those examples , build on what works , chart a new course in how we approach punishment and prison .
The United States has less than 5 percent of the world 's population but almost 25 percent of the world 's total prison population .
And our country has nearly one-third of all the world 's women prisoners .
The numbers of people in prison are much higher than they were 30 or 40 years ago , even though crime rates are much lower .
And of the more than 2 million Americans incarcerated right now , a significant percentage are nonviolent offenders people held for violating parole , or minor drug crimes , or who are simply awaiting trial in backlogged courts .
Keeping them behind bars does little to reduce crime , but it does a lot to tear apart families and communities .
It 's time to change our approach and end the era of mass incarceration in America .
And we must do more to address the epidemic of gun violence that is plaguing our country .
I consider this a national emergency . The vast majority of Americans , including the vast majority of gun owners , support commonsense steps to reduce gun violence like comprehensive background checks and closing the loopholes that let guns fall into the wrong hands .
But even after what we 've seen in Paris and in other places , Congress won't even bring up a bill that will prohibit anyone on the no-fly list from buying a gun .
Think about it : it seems reasonable to assume if you are too dangerous to fly in America , you are too dangerous to buy a gun in America .
And we must get rid of the special immunity Congress gave the gun industry , something that was a mistake plain and simple that needs to be reversed .
And yes , we must strengthen that most fundamental citizenship right :
the right to vote . I thought we 'd solved that problem thanks to many of the lawyers we are honoring today .
But unfortunately , there is mischief afoot , and some people are just determined to do what they can to keep other Americans from voting .
Now , I know because I was here at Joe Reed 's invitation a few weeks ago about the dispute that 's going on in Alabama , where there 's a strict new voter ID law in effect , and then a lot of the DMV offices in every single county where African Americans make up more than 75 percent of registered voters were closed .
Now , that would make getting driver 's licenses and personal ID cards much harder , which , in turn , would make voting much harder too .
The right to vote is so fundamental to our democracy , but it 's also about people 's dignity .
The right to stand up and say , I am a citizen .
I am an American . My voice and my vote count .
No matter who you are or where you come from or what you look like or how much money you have , that means something .
As Ben was saying with that powerful quote from Justice Marshall , before the law we are all to be equal , and in the voting booth we are all to be equal as well , and that cannot and must not be taken away .
And finally , we must be honest about the larger and deeper inequalities that continue to exist across our country .
You can't credibly talk about reforming our criminal justice system and strengthening our democracy without also talking about increasing economic opportunity , improving education , giving more support to working families .
Our children deserve the best start in life . And we have to do more to make that possible .
Now , I do have this most wonderful , amazing 14-month-old granddaughter .
And I listen carefully to Ben talking about Brooklyn . And I 've got no doubt that he and his wife are going to do everything it takes to make sure she 's prepared to pursue her dreams .
But I want that for every child . And you cannot credibly pledge to do your part to make our country more just without also being willing to take a look at yourself , at our own lives , our own preconceptions .
We each need to do the hard work of rebuilding our bonds with one another .
This isn't just about strengthening ties between police and citizens although that is very important .
It 's about strengthening ties across society , between and among neighbors , colleagues , even people with whom we profoundly disagree .
It 's about how we treat each other , what we value together .
This is so fundamental to who we are , as a nation , and everything we could hope to achieve .
And those of us who serve in politics , or who want to lead our country have a special responsibility to bring Americans together , not pull us apart .
And it may be unusual , hearing a presidential candidate say we need more love and kindness , but that is exactly what we need right now .
Indeed , it 's what we have always needed . After the first day of the bus boycott 60 years ago , that evening , thousands of people were jammed in the streets , inside the church , when Martin Luther King , Jr. stepped to the pulpit .
You go back and read what he said that night , of course he spoke about ( inaudible ) , about citizenship , about fairness under the law .
And then he started talking about love . Love , he said , is one of the pinnacle parts of the Christian faith .
And there is another side called justice . And I love this , especially as a recovering lawyer .
Justice is really love in calculation . Justice is love correcting that which would work against love .
Standing beside love is always justice . Now , decades after her place in history was secured , Rosa Parks came to Washington to sit with me at the 1999 State of the Union .
She looked beautiful in a jeweled-colored dress with her head crowned in a long braid , just like in her booking photos the day she was arrested .
The entire Congress rose to give her a long standing ovation .
You see , all of our nation 's leaders , Democrats and Republicans alike , united in their esteem for her , when she was once the focal point of perhaps the most divisive issue of our time , well , that was a powerful indicator of how far we had come .
Rosa hadn't changed much . She was the same lovely , dignified , determined person she always was .
But America had changed . It 's always struck me how , depending on the way you look at it , Rosa Parks either did something tremendous or something rather humble .
On the one hand , she helped ignite a social movement that sought to finish the work of the Civil War and redeem the promise of the 13th , 14th , and 15th , Amendments .
On the other hand , she finished her shift at the Montgomery Fair Department Store , took her regular bus home , sat where she and other African Americans always sat , and , when the bus driver ordered her to move , she quietly , so quietly if the bus were still running , no one could have heard her above the engine noise said ,
No . That 's how history often gets made , doesn't it ?
On an ordinary day , by seemingly ordinary people , doing something extraordinary .
It 's only when we look back that we realize that 's the day when everything began to change .
That 's how it was with December 1 , 1955 .
I suspect Rosa Parks would be the first to say that what happened 60 years ago today and everything that followed was the result of countless acts of courage and sacrifice by people from many walks of life .
And I 'm sure she would also , Attorney Gray , acknowledge the critical role that attorneys play .
As we look forward , I hope we keep in mind what we can do on days like this to begin to make a difference .
Maybe only with a few people . Maybe , though , to start ripples that will change history .
There is no doubt in my mind that the power of our Constitution , of the rule of law , of the courage of those who fight to uphold it , is one of the great assets the United States of America has .
Let us go forth today , challenged to do our part to make sure that this generation will see the work of justice and equality , as well as love and kindness .
I look forward to being your partner in the years ahead .
Thank you all very much . Hillary Clinton launched Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders ( AAPI ) for Hillary alongside CAPAC Chair Judy Chu and dozens of AAPI elected officials and community leaders from across the nation in San Gabriel , California .
The AAPI community is rapidly growing and a key part of the social fabric of who we are as a nation .
From adding rich diversity , to spurring small businesses and economic growth , the AAPI community has helped build this country and strengthen our communities .
Clinton discussed what 's at stake in this election for the AAPI community , and how she 'll fight for them as president .
She outlined her plan to strengthen the economy and create more good-paying jobs , fight for comprehensive immigration reform , and defend and enhance the Affordable Care Act .
Thank you so very , very much . Oh my goodness , this is very exciting for me .
I am so honored to be kicking off AAPI for me and this campaign , but I really see it as for all of us , this is a campaign that will do everything that the Congresswoman just said : to make sure that all people in our country have the chance to live up to their potential , that all people are taken to the heights of what our great nation can offer and that they are part of the diversity that makes us stronger , to be respected and lifted up .
That 's what we will do together . I want to thank Congresswoman Judy Chu for those very kind and stirring words .
Her support in this campaign and in the past mean the world to me .
We had some excellent conversations about the agenda that the caucus chief chairs and Congress is working on , and I was proud to pledge my support .
And I want to thank all of the Asian American and Pacific Islander leaders , activists , volunteers , and organizers who are here today and by my side as we go through the primary process and then we bring home a big win in November of 2016 .
Now , there are so many elected officials here which is a great sign of the importance of people registering to vote and voting , but also being willing to run for office .
I wanted to acknowledge a few of them . Representative Sablan from the North Mariana Islands is with us .
Norm Mineta , former Secretary of Transportation and Commerce . John Chiang , California State Treasurer .
Betty Yee , State Comptroller , Fiona Ma , Board of Equalization , Irene Bueno , the AAPI Director in 2008 who worked so hard for me , Trung Ta , the founding Chairman of the Vietnamese American Democratic Club .
And it 's exciting to see so many of you here in this town , whose mayor is with us , Jason Pu , the Mayor of San Gabriel .
In addition to the members of my campaign team that Judy mentioned , I also want to recognize Dennis Cheng who is our Finance Director .
And we will be having an event after this , and I am very proud and grateful for all of you who are supporting that .
This is especially meaningful for me , for a personal reason as well as the great outpouring of support that you are demonstrating .
My late mother grew up in Alhambra . She didn't have a very easy childhood by any means .
She was basically rejected by her parents when she was very young in Chicago .
And with a younger sister , they were put on a train by themselves to travel from Chicago to Los Angeles to live with her paternal grandparents who had a small house in Alhambra .
She went to high school there . But by the age of 14 , it was clear that her grandparents didn't want her either .
So she left that home and went to work as a maid in a home somewhere here in the area .
I can't tell you how grateful I am to whoever that family was , and here 's why .
The mother of the home recognized my mother wanted to go to high school .
So , she said to my mom , if you get up really early and you get your chores done , you can go to high school .
Then you 'll have to come back and finish all of them in the evening .
Now , that may sound harsh to some people , for a fourteen-year-old girl to be put into that position .
But my mother was so grateful . The problem was that the home where she was working and living was some distance from Alhambra , a couple of miles .
I 'm not sure where . So she literally had to get those chores done and then run to high school .
But she so much wanted an education . And she was so proud when so many years later , she actually went back to Alhambra High School , to a reunion .
It had to be the 70th reunion . There weren't many folks there , but she knew a lot of them .
And they had such a great time . And the high school even gave her a role in the parade for homecoming .
So , when I think about this part of California , the first thing I think about is my mom and how kind people were to her here when her own family was not .
And I know how important family is to all of you .
And that 's how I see our country . I see us , when we 're at our best , as lifting up families , helping families to be strong , helping families get the support they need to do the best they can for their children and for their parents .
And I 've said in this campaign , the stakes are very high .
I want to be a president who deals with the economy to make sure it works for everybody , not just those at the top .
I want to keep Americans safe and keep our country strong around the world .
And I also want to do what I can as president to help deal with the problems that keep families up at night .
Sometimes it 's an illness . Sometimes it 's a real risk with a job or a small business .
Sometimes it 's the difficulty of affording college . I know
about a lot of these problems and I hear from so many people across our country .
So , standing here today it 's really a great privilege to be launching this exciting part of my campaign in a place that my mother never forgot the kindness that was shown to her and the chance she had eventually to graduate from high school .
I was so proud to work with the AAPI community when I was a senator from New York .
America 's ties to the Asia-Pacific region have always been important , but in the 21st century they will be absolutely vital .
I was very proud when my husband 's administration launched the first-ever White House Initiative on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders .
And I know there are some people here they were young people then who actually worked in the White House , worked in the Clinton Administration , helped to put that initiative into place .
The focus was for the federal government to be more deliberate about understanding the challenges helping all parts of the AAPI community succeed .
And when I was secretary of state for President Obama , and we launched the pivot to Asia , we were sending a very strong message that we wanted to rebuild ties with our allies and reassert the United States as a pacific power .
So we have the groundwork here at home and around the world laid , but it 's going to take a President working as your partner , standing with you , fighting for you every single day to make the kind of progress that we can make together .
Now , I think of this story through the lives of so many people whom I have gotten to know over a lot of decades .
One of them is Norm Mineta , who is with us today .
Now , some of you know Norm as a dedicated public servant , an elected official , a cabinet secretary , both a Democratic and Republican administration .
But he also reminds us of an important lesson about our nation , and what it takes to make it work for everyone .
You see , when Norm was a child during World War II , he and his family were forcibly removed from their home and put into an internment camp .
He was ten years old . And he was a huge baseball fan .
And as he stood with his parents , waiting for the train to take them away , a military police officer confiscated his possessions , including his most prized possession , his favorite baseball bat .
That wasn't in some far away country . That was here , in the United States .
Yet despite his own personal experience , Norm never stopped believing in the promise of America .
And that 's one of the reasons he was motivated to serve our country , to represent his neighbors and to make a real difference on everything from infrastructure to protecting our oceans .
I tell you this story and I think if we had time , we could hear dozens and dozens of stories .
Personal stories about the journeys that brought you , your parents , your grandparents here to America .
But I want to make a larger point . I disagree with the Republican front-runner , Mr. Trump .
See , I think America is great because generations of hardworking Americans have made us great .
Our values and our ideals have made us great . Now it is up to us to make sure we are even greater when we pass on the opportunities that have been made available to all of us to our children and our grandchildren .
This is a lesson we would never dare to forget .
We are a country built by the hard work of generations of immigrants and we are stronger because of our diversity and our openness .
Now , I really wish that I didn't have to stand here today and say any of this , but we are hearing a lot of hateful rhetoric out on the campaign trail .
Calling immigrants drug dealers and rapists , using offensive terms to describe the citizen children of immigrants , saying we should bar all Muslims from entering our country .
Republican candidates have said they would turn away widows and orphans and apply a religious test to people seeking asylum as refugees .
They forget a fundamental lesson about our great country . Being an open and tolerant society does not make us it 's at the core of our strength of who we are in America .
It 's a creed as old as our founding .
E Pluribus Unum , out of many we are one .
So we have a lot at stake in this election .
Either we 're going to defend the progress that we have made and build upon it or we are going to let a new Republican president rip it all away .
Because , make no mistake about it , what you 're hearing from all of them , is the same failed policies that lead to the Great Recession .
They want to slash taxes on the wealthy , put consumers at the mercy of drug companies , insurers and polluters let Wall Street write its own rules again .
And we know , don't we , how that ends up .
We have seen this happen before , now . My friends on the other side of the aisle don't like it when I say this , but it 's a fact .
The economy works better when we have a Democratic president in the White House .
In fact , you are four times more likely to have a recession when you have a Republican in the White House .
And just think back if you can bear it , to how bad things were in 2008 .
After that election , President-elect Obama called me . He asked me to come see him in Chicago .
I didn't know why . Turned out he wanted to ask me to be Secretary of State .
But before we got to that , he said , You know , when it comes to the economy , it is so much worse than they told us .
We were losing 800,000 jobs a month . The American auto industry was on the brink of total collapse .
I don't think President Obama gets the credit he deserves for digging us out of a hole that he inherited from the prior administration .
So we are standing , but we 're not yet running the way we need to .
I want us to get more good-paying jobs . I want us to raise incomes for hard-working families .
I want us to raise the minimum wage , guarantee equal pay for women , protect workers ' rights to organize and bargain .
I want us to build 21st century infrastructure our bridges , our roads , our tunnels , our ports , airports , transit systems .
And we need to combat climate change , which the other party won't even recognize .
The best way to do that is by investing in clean renewable energy , which will do so much to lift up our economy .
I want the United States to be the clean energy superpower of the 21st Century .
There are three candidate countries for that role : China , Germany , and us .
I want it to be us . I want us to use our innovation and entrepreneurship to make a difference .
Now , California is already a leader on this , but there are other states that are doing more as well .
I spent a lot of time , as you know , in Iowa .
They get one-third of their electricity from wind . We can make investments like this across America .
I know we have got a lot of small business owners in this crowd today .
I want to be the small business president . I want to make it easier to start small businesses , grow small businesses , get credit for your small businesses .
And I especially want to reduce barriers to women- and minority-owned small businesses .
I know how hard people are working so let 's make it easier to balance work and family .
That 's especially true for parents of young children . We 've got to join the rest of the world by guaranteeing paid family leave .
But it 's also true for people who are taking care of their aging parents , isn't it ?
As a nation , we are not valuing and supporting family caregivers the way we should .
So here 's what I am proposing . A new tax credit to help defray costs for people taking care of an older relative .
I want to expand Social Security so people who take time out from their careers , primarily women , to raise a child or care for a family member are not penalized when they go to collect their retirement checks .
I also have a comprehensive plan to invest in research to prevent , effectively treat , and make possible a cure for Alzheimer 's disease by 2025 .
How many of you know somebody with Alzheimer 's ? Yeah .
Every crowd I 'm in , so many hands go up .
I know what a burden it is . It is an emotional and physical and financial burden .
People do it because they love their spouse or their parent or their grandparent .
But it shouldn't be so hard and we must invest more money in research .
It is the sixth leading cause of death . In the top ten causes of death , it 's the only one where we have no drugs to treat it .
We don't know how to prevent it . And we can't figure out how to cure it .
Under my administration , after having talked to scientists and researchers who are doing this cutting-edge work , we are going to make progress and in ten years , I know we will have a big impact on how to prevent , how to treat , and maybe find a cure for Alzheimer 's .
I also want to make college more affordable again for hardworking families and their students .
As Judy said , I 've proposed a New College Compact that will let young people go to public colleges and universities without taking out loans to pay tuition .
We are going to let you refinance your student debt .
You can refinance your mortgage and your car payment . You ought to be able to refinance your student debt to save thousands of dollars .
And again , as Judy pointed out , we know our immigration system is broken .
Millions of undocumented people are working and raising their families here , living in fear of seeing their families ripped apart .
There are millions of family members of lawful permanent residents and U.S. citizens who wait for years , sometimes for decades , to have their families join them in America .
We can do better than this . We could add hundreds of billions of dollars to our GDP by passing comprehensive immigration reform .
We could shore up Social Security because right now , undocumented workers contribute 12 billion dollars a year and if we have comprehensive immigration reform , it 's projected to go up to 20 billion .
Now ultimately , this is more than an economic issue , it 's more than a political issue .
This is a family issue . If we say that we value and support families , then we should act as though we do .
That 's why I voted for comprehensive immigration legislation in the Senate .
That 's why I will fight for comprehensive immigration reform with a path to full and equal citizenship .
That 's why you can count on me to defend President Obama 's executive actions on DACA and DAPA .
And I would go even further . There are so many more undocumented people with deep ties in their communities who deserve the chance to stay .
I will fight for them , too . When I was a senator , I worked to reduce the backlog for family visas and reunite immigrant families .
I will keep up that fight . Applicants from the Asia-Pacific region make up about 40 percent of the family visa backlog .
Some from the Philippines have been waiting for a visa for 23 years .
If you 're a U.S. citizen and your brother lives in India , it will take at least 12 years just to get him a visa .
And finally , we 've got to do more to help the millions of people who are eligible for citizenship take that last step .
I will work to expand fee waivers so more people can get a break on the costs .
I will increase access to language programs to help people boost their English proficiency .
I don't want anyone who could be a citizen now to miss out on that opportunity .
And for all our citizens , we 're going to fight to protect your right to vote and make sure your voices are counted on Election Day .
I would like to see every 18 year old automatically registered to vote .
I 'd like to see more early voting . And I would like to see the AAPI community get out and vote more .
That is essential because right now , it 's one of the fastest-growing communities in this country , but it 's a community that votes at a lower rate than others .
So we face a lot of challenges . But I am excited .
I am confident . I am optimistic about our country .
I don't understand the rhetoric coming from the Republicans . Because to me , they are living somewhere besides where we are .
Many of the things they say just don't reflect my experience or the lives of people that I meet and talk with every day .
So American families have a lot at stake in this election .
A new president is going to walk into the Oval Office in January 20th , 2017 .
And we need it to be a president who can do all parts of the job .
Make the economy work for everyone with good paying jobs and rising incomes .
Keeping families safe and our country strong . Tackling the problems that keep families up at night , like Alzheimer 's , or Autism , or addiction .
Now , I 'll go anywhere , talk with anyone , and work my heart out to find common ground .
But I 'll also stand my ground for you . I want to share one additional story .
I 'm very proud to have so many Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders working with me on this campaign .
But I want to tell you about one more . Cheska is a DREAMer .
She came here from the Philippines with her family when she was a young girl .
Her father had a work visa , but he lost his job in the recession and that meant the whole family became undocumented .
When Cheska was a senior in high school , teachers were asking her every day ,
what are your college plans ? She was in ROTC . She found the courage to tell her ROTC instructor about her situation .
And her school stepped up . They supported her . They helped her investigate DACA and apply for relief .
And she got it . And now she 's helping her four siblings with their applications .
The day after I announced I was running for president , Cheska signed up to volunteer with this campaign .
Now she 's a field organizer in Las Vegas . She 's putting her college education on hold because she wants to help shape the future of the country that has given her so many opportunities .
I want to give young people like Cheska every chance to succeed .
I believe they can make great contributions to our country .
But I need your help to do that . I thank everybody that came from Nevada .
I would ask any of you interested in the campaign to help out in Nevada and to sign up .
Some of you I know have traveled across the country for me or for President Obama , so you 're used to being in the cold weather and the hot weather as we pick our nominee and I hope you will consider being involved again .
It 's very important because the stakes have never been higher .
Now in the back of the room you 'll find some of our volunteers ready to help you sign up to get the votes out in Nevada and if you can't travel , you can make phone calls .
And then sign up for other early states . I hope you 'll talk to them today .
I started by talking about my mom . I am the granddaughter on my father 's side of an immigrant factory worker .
He came to this country as a young boy . Went to work in the lace mills in Scranton , Pennsylvania .
Worked really hard all of his life to give his children a greater opportunity .
Well he did , all three of his sons including my dad went to college .
And my dad became a small businessman , a really small businessman .
He served in the Navy in World War II and had a small business again when he came out .
He believed in our country , he believed in the work ethic and individual responsibility that so many people here exhibit .
He set a great example about all of that for me .
My mom 's fight through a difficult childhood . She never stopped believing that the future could be better .
She never stopped being grateful for our country . So came by to my commitment to America and our future through my parents .
Through my family . And now , I have this amazing 15-month-old granddaughter .
And I think about her every day and I 'm grateful that my daughter and her husband send me pictures , videos , so no matter where I am and what 's going on , I can just click them on and watch them again for the 15th or 16th time .
And of course Bill and I will do whatever again that she has the best opportunities but I want from the bottom of my heart , that is not enough .
It matters what kind of country she grows up in .
And it matters what kind of world is out there waiting for her .
And it matters not that our grandchild can realize the promise of America , but that everybody 's child and grandchild has the same chance to do the same .
I am fighting to give every one of our children the chance to fulfill their dreams in our country .
A nation of DREAMers and builders . If you will help me , that is what we will do together .
Thank you all very much ! Hillary was joined at the event by representatives of the U.S. Women 's Chamber of Commerce , who announced their endorsement of Hillary .
It 's their first-ever presidential endorsement . Thank you . Thank you all .
I am very excited to be here at Southern New Hampshire University .
I well remember this is the location of where I had my final rally before the New Hampshire primary in 2008 so I kind of consider this a lucky place , and it 's especially fortunate to be here with so many whom I have worked with , and whose accomplishments I admire , starting with Terrie Norelli , the former speaker of the New Hampshire house of Representatives .
A real leader , and you 've got just a taste of that .
She was much too kind to me , but you could see the energy and the passion in what she had to say , because she 's been fighting for these issues her entire life .
And I am so delighted she 's with me . And MaryAnn Manoogian , thank you for being the leader of the center for Women 's Business Advancement here at the University .
I 'll have a little bit to say about that later , but this center is making such a difference .
You got just a small appetizer from MaryAnn about the good work it 's doing .
Small business is the backbone of our country 's economy , and we need to do more to encourage the startup and the growth of small businesses , and that 's particularly true for women-owned small businesses , because they still don't have , as MaryAnn said , the support they need to really take off .
So thank you for what you 're doing here . I also want to thank Senator Donna Soucy , who was on the program before me .
Provost Patty Lynott , thank you very much . Also , former Congresswoman Carol Shake-Porter is here , and I hope she is the future congresswoman again in the first district , and a number of other elected officials and distinguished guests but mostly for the students who are here .
I really appreciate your being with us , because we are going to talk about women 's economic empowerment and the role that women can and should play in our economy .
But before we start talking about that , I want to say something about what happened yesterday in San Bernardino , California .
We don't know yet everything about this specific attack . President Obama spoke this morning about the possibility that it was terror related .
I know that everyone from the FBI to local police are doing everything they can to find the answers , tracking every lead , looking at every angle , and I 'm confident that they will determine what happened , and take whatever steps are necessary to prevent future attacks .
We do have the best law enforcement in the world , the best military , the best intelligence services .
We 've seen that again and again . I was , as many of you may know , a senator from New York on 9/11 , and I spent a great deal of my time in the years since working with law enforcement , working with the military , working with intelligence services to do everything we could to prevent future attacks .
We 've seen their expertise and professionalism again and again .
We 're sure to see more of that in the days ahead .
But I also want to note this : It 's important to remember and I know this from the work I did as a senator , particularly with law enforcement the vast majority of Muslim Americans are just as concerned and heart-broken about this as anyone else .
And no matter what motivation these killers these murderers had , we can say one thing for certain : They should not have been able to do this .
We cannot go on with losing 90 people a day to gun violence .
I don't believe we can stop every incident of gun violence , but we sure can stop a lot of them .
And we need to take action now . No parent should have to worry about going to a holiday party after work , or about sending their kids to school , or going to a movie theater , or even going to church .
No one should have that basic sense of safety and security ripped away from them .
The vast majority of Americans support common-sense steps to reduce and prevent gun violence , yet Congress has failed to pass even the most obvious measures despite the fact 92 percent of Americans support these measures , 83 percent of gun owners support them .
So just what will it take for Congress to overcome the intimidation of the gun lobby and do something as sensible as making sure people on the terrorist watch list can't buy weapons ?
If you are too dangerous to fly in America , you are too dangerous to buy a gun in America .
How can anyone , anyone of good conscience , disagree with that ?
During this campaign , I will continue to speak out .
I know there are some who don't believe we should be talking about this issue , or wish to somehow push it into the background .
Well , I will not be silenced . I will continue to talk about what we as a nation must do to protect ourselves and I will , as President , do everything I can , every single day , to keep our country , our communities , and our families safe and strong .
Now keeping our country safe goes hand-in-hand with keeping our country prosperous .
And that 's what brings me here today to talk about America 's economic future .
And key to that economic future is making sure all Americans have a chance to climb those ladders of opportunity , to fulfill the basic bargain of America : That if you do your part and you work hard , you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead .
But what is often overlooked is how important it is to our overall economic prosperity that women have every opportunity to contribute to the fullest of their ability , their talent , and their hard work .
It 's also vital to America 's families , especially at a time when record numbers of women are their household 's primary breadwinners .
Now , this should seem obvious . After all , more than 50 percent of Americans are women , and if we want to build the most productive and highly skilled workforce that we possibly can , we need to value women .
That means making it easier for women to find good jobs and rise in the workplace .
It means making it easier for women to start businesses and gain new skills .
And it means treating women like the valuable workers and citizens we are .
And you shouldn't have to be an economist to see that .
This is common sense . And yet in many ways our economy is still organized to achieve the exact opposite outcome .
We don't make it easy for women to contribute . We make it hard .
And we make it especially hard for women to both work and raise a family .
Consider this : Right now , in many states , quality childcare is more expensive than in-state college tuition .
Here in New Hampshire it costs over $ 11,000 a year to pay for childcare for your baby .
So that puts working parents , especially working mothers , in a really tough spot either they pay for childcare , even though it can eat up a huge portion of their paycheck , and for low income families here in New Hampshire it 's almost a full quarter of their income , or they go with a lower-quality option , and then spend the whole workday worrying about whether their kids are okay .
Now some take a third path : They give up trying to hold a full-time job all together .
They either go par t-t ime or stay home , which is , of course , an absolutely legitimate , valid choice , even though many of them may want to continue to work and their families could use that income .
They want badly for the numbers to add up , but they just don't .
Or , think about this : Right now the United States is the only major economy in the world without any form of paid leave .
So for many workers , if your child gets sick , or if your aging parent needs someone to take them to the doctor , or if you have a new baby and you want to spend time bonding and taking care of that little one , you risk losing a paycheck , or even losing your job all together .
Then there 's the wage gap . You know , here in New Hampshire , women are graduating from college at a higher rate than women in the rest of the country .
And New Hampshire women are joining the workforce at a higher rate than the rest of the country .
But you knew there 'd be a but the wage gap for New Hampshire women is actually slightly larger than it is for women nationwide .
In this state , women make an average of just 77 cents for every dollar that men make .
In other words , New Hampshire women are achieving more in terms of education and employment , but earning less .
And for some women this adds up to thousands of dollars a year .
That 's money they and their families could really use and nationwide , women of color make the least of all .
It is past time for Congress to pass the Paycheck Fairness Act .
I sponsored and fought for this when I was in the Senate , because this law would do something very important and very simple : It would make it easier for workers to discover if they 're being paid unfairly , and do something about it .
It would make it harder for employers to justify paying men and women different wages for the same work .
That seems like the kind of law we ought to be able to support .
But , in fact , it 's very difficult with the Republicans to promote this idea of equal pay for equal work .
They don't believe in it , they don't support it .
And honest to goodness , I don't know who they spend their time talking to , because I talk to a lot of people who are quite worried about this .
I 'll give you just one example . I met a young man in New Hampshire here some weeks ago who said to me , I want to tell you why I 'm supporting you .
I asked him please do . He said ,
Because when I had my first real job , when I was 17-years-old , I went to work as a cashier in the same store where my mother had worked for four years .
He said I was really excited about it , because it was like the first adult job .
So when I brought home my paycheck , he told me , after two weeks , I proudly showed it to my mom , and I saw her face fall .
And I asked her what was wrong . And she said ,
They 're paying you more per hour than they pay me , and I 've been there four years . '
Now I 've asked people , how could that be ?
And his mother never would have known , because it would have been possibly grounds for termination if she 'd asked any of the other cashiers .
But she obviously knew , because of her son . I 've asked people , how could that be , and basically it 's well , you know , he 's a young man , maybe he 'll stay with the company , maybe he 'll go up in the ranks .
Well , what about his mom ? What about her rights ?
What about how hard she worked to support him and their family ?
Right now you could be fired , or otherwise retaliated against if you discuss or disclose your wages .
So it 's really hard for a lot of us even to know how bad the problem is .
That 's why the Paycheck Fairness Act would remove , prohibit , that kind of retaliation .
We live in an age of great transparency . People ought to know what other people are being paid for doing the same jobs .
And we 're going to work to get that passed .
And let 's not forget the minimum wage . Two thirds of minimum wage workers are women , and many of them are also raising families .
Even if they 're working full time , they 're stuck below the poverty line .
I don't think that 's right . No one working full time in America should be forced to raise their children in poverty but that 's exactly what 's happening for a lot of families .
You know what , that 's bad for the entire economy .
It 's another thing my Republican friends don't agree with .
But those of you who have studied economics know we are a 70 percent consumption economy , right ?
Henry Ford understood that . Remember when he got criticized for paying the autoworkers more than anybody else was making ?
And a lot of other business leaders said why are you paying your workers , I think it was like $1 a day or something incredible .
He said why , because I want them to buy my cars .
So if we don't raise wages we 're never going to get the economy moving on all cylinders like it should .
It 's bad for the economy . It means here in New Hampshire families have less to spend on groceries , or rent , or gas .
And so a minimum wage that 's too low holds us all back no matter what our income .
We need to give Americans a raise . Now let me be clear , I 'm not talking about women who choose to remain at home and not to work outside the home .
We even see more fathers doing that . That 's great .
And they should be able to make that choice , and we should support it , whatever the right choice is for themselves and their families .
But for too many parents , not working is not an option .
But working is so much harder on families than it needs to be .
In this global economy we have to be as competitive as possible , and we cannot afford to leave any talent on the sidelines .
That 's what we 're doing when we relegate American women to lower paying jobs , or when we throw all kinds of obstacles into their path .
So they can't stay in the workforce , they can't compete for a promotion , or start a business .
Let me just give you a little context here , because I want you to understand why this is such a pressing problem if we want to grow our economy again .
Over the past 40 years , as more and more women entered into our workforce , our economy grew by $3.5 trillion .
That 's a lot of growth . And we rose to seventh in the world out of the world 's top 24 economies in women 's labor force participation .
But that progress has stalled . As of 2013 we have dropped to 19 .
That represents a lot of unused potential . And as we 're falling in the rankings , other countries are climbing because they 're putting family-friendly policies into place , like paid leave and affordable childcare , universal pre-kindergarten , and we aren't .
This will put us at a disadvantage in the global economy in the future .
It 's time to recognize paid leave is not a luxury .
Quality childcare is not a luxury . Fair pay and fair scheduling aren't luxuries .
They are growth strategies , and necessary to our national competitiveness .
And , by the way , they don't just matter to women .
You know , dads who want to bond with their newborns , they care about the quality of their kid 's daycare .
Sons are taking care of aging parents like the young teacher I met here in Manchester , who is taking care of his 84-year-old mother with Alzheimer 's .
He can't afford full time care for her . He can't afford to quit his job , because then he couldn't support her .
He 's a teacher , so what does he do , he takes his mother to work with him , because there 's no other alternative for him to be the kind of son he intends to be .
Most husbands I know want their wives to earn a fair wage these policies are good for all of us .
And we should do it in a way to put them in place that doesn't impose unfair burdens on businesses , especially small businesses .
We have some friends here from the U.S. Women 's Chamber of Commerce .
And they 're also doing terrific work helping women entrepreneurs get the support they need to start and grow their businesses .
Here in New Hampshire , as an example , women-owned businesses employ nearly 39,000 people .
And women are opening more than one-quarter of all new businesses .
I think we can do even better . If you have a good idea , and you 're willing to work hard , you should be able to put it into action .
So I want to build on the work of the Women 's Chamber of Commerce .
I want to help more women get access to startup capital and professional mentoring .
I want more women-owned businesses to compete and win federal contracts .
Earlier today I was proud to receive the endorsement of the Women 's Chamber .
And as president I will work with them , with the center here , and other advocates , to break down barriers so that more and more small businesses and women-owned businesses can get started and be successful .
I said before I want to be the small business president , and I mean it .
I also want to mention another barrier that fell just a few hours ago , when Secretary of Defense Ash Carter made an historic announcement .
For the first time ever , every single position in the military including all combat jobs will be open to women .
We 've seen women in our armed forces prove their heroism and abilities ; now our official policy is catching up .
And women who are qualified for these positions should be able to compete and win them .
Now I know there 's a big difference between what I 'm advocating for and what you hear when you listen to the Republican debates .
Nearly all of them do oppose paid leave , none of them want to raise the minimum wage .
They don't really have plans for supporting working families . But here 's the bottom line : We need to throw everything we 've got at making the economy work for everybody again .
We need broad-based prosperity again . We need rising incomes again .
We need to unstack the deck that has been stacked in favor of those at the top .
And you don't do that if you just say the same old things over and over again and expect a different result .
Their economic policies did not work . We got the Great Recession .
We had to dig ourselves out of that ditch . We cannot go back there one more time .
So here 's my bottom line : What 's good for women is good for America .
I 'm more convinced of that than ever before . When women are strong , families are strong and when families are strong , America is strong .
As president , I will fight for more opportunities for women to develop their talents and pursue their dreams .
But I will always put families first , just like I always have .
That is a promise . And I hope you will work with me , be my partner to make sure we get that done .
Thank you all very much . Wow . Thank you , thank you all .
Thank you . I am really delighted to be here on the first winter day of this season , to be here in this beautiful city and church that has been the site of a lot of occasions .
And especially to be introduced by Brenda , who , as she said , I first met in a town hall in Dover all those months ago .
And you know , when you call on people in town halls , as you 'll see in a minute , you have no idea what they 're going to say or what they 're going to ask .
And when I called on her , she basically said ,
I have a husband with early onset Alzheimer 's . I have a mother with Alzheimer 's .
I 'm taking care of them . What are you going to do about Alzheimer 's ? '
And it really caused me to think hard about the kind of president that I want to be .
Obviously I want to be a president who gets the economy moving for everybody , and gets incomes rising and more good-paying jobs , and I want to be a president that keeps us safe and secure and takes on the threats and dangers that we face .
But I also want to be a president who understands that the problems that keep you up at night are ones that we also have to take seriously .
So it means the world to me to have her support in this campaign .
And as I have said to her and to others who have raised issues with me during the course of my time here in New Hampshire , I will do everything I can to try to find answers .
And Alzheimer 's , as she said , we have 5 million people currently suffering , the projection is for many millions more .
It is the sixth leading cause of death in America , but unlike the other causes in the top ten , there 's no real path to prevention or effective treatment , or a cure , as there is with other diseases that take so many lives .
So , my proposal is that we tackle all three of those what can we do to try to prevent it , what can we do to try to more effectively treat it ?
And what would it take to invest in finding a cure ?
And after talking to experts , the leading experts in our country not just in Alzheimer 's but in other neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson'sthe overwhelming response was if we invested just $2 billion more a year , we would make tremendous progress , and we would have a real shot at understanding more about this disease , and trying to cure it .
And the heaven 's support what we are going to do on behalf of Alzheimer 's and the patients , the families , and the caregivers .
I want to thank my friend , Terie Norelli , who I see here , for her great service and leadership over so many years , and for her friendship .
And I just want to make a few other quick acknowledgements and then we will move on to be ready for the questions .
The mayor , I want to thank the mayor . Where 's Mayor Lister ?
I saw him earlier , he 's here somewhere . There he is !
There he is . Thank you so much , Mayor .
Wonderful to see you , thank you for your support .
And , to the South Church , thank you for letting us be here today .
And to the overflow we 're delighted they 're here as well .
As Brenda said , on January 20th , 2017 , someone will raise a hand and take the oath of office and become our 45th president .
That person will , after being sworn in and the celebrations that go along with an inauguration , go into the White House , go into the Oval Office , and face the challenges that await .
This will be a consequential election in so many ways , because we have work to do .
I 'm excited by the work , I 'm confident and optimistic about the work we can do together .
But I need all of you to be part of this campaign , to be part of the first in the nation primary because , in many ways , you are the first or depending upon how you define it , last line of defense .
The decision that New Hampshire makes is so important . And I 've had a great time traveling across the state , meeting , by now , thousands and thousands of people , having a chance to set forth my ideas , and to answer questions on whatever might be on someone 's mind .
And I know that we are going to make the right decision .
Not because my name will be on the ballot , but because all of us know what the stakes are , and how high they happen to be .
So , I 'm excited and very much looking forward to the sprint toward the primary and to have a chance to hear even more from more folks here in the Granite State about what is on your mind .
About the big economic challenges , the security issues , and all those problems that keep you up at night .
I 've learned a lot listening to folks here in New Hampshire learned a lot about the struggles , the opportunities , the disappointments .
As you know , I 've had two full town hall meetings just on the issue of substance abuse .
When I made a list of what I was going to talk about in this campaign , it wasn't on that list .
But on my first trip here to New Hampshire in Keene , that was what was raised with me .
And then on visit after visit , I was given mass cards , showing the pictures of beautiful , young people no longer with us because of overdoses .
I met those in recovery who thankfully were able to get help when they needed it .
I met grandmothers like myself raising children because their children couldn'tlost to opioid addiction , heroine addiction .
So that 's why it became a big issue to me .
I will never stop leading with the values that I was raised with about who we are as Americans , what we 're capable of doing .
I will never stop listening , learning about what 's on people 's minds .
I think you actually learn more when you listen . And I will never stop trying to work with you to solve problems .
That 's the America I was raised in , that 's the America I think we all cherish , and that 's the America that I 'm going to do everything I can as your President to make sure it 's stronger and better and fairer for everybody going forward .
Thank you very much , thank you , Haim , for those kind words .
Thanks to you and Sheryl and your family for important initiative and for once again gathering us here , together .
It 's wonderful being back with so many friends and colleagues , including many from the diplomatic corps and of course many from Israel .
I want to thank Martin , Tammy , everyone at Brookings .
We look to you to help us understand a world that seems more complex and confounding than ever .
And we are grateful for your insights and for always helping us reach for statesmanship over partisanship .
Before I begin , I want to acknowledge the loss of a beloved member of our foreign policy family , Sandy Berger .
A friend and counselor to me and to many of us .
Sandy was a wise and brilliant man . Although I was not able to be at the service on Friday , I know many of you were , and my husband told me how extraordinary it was to see generations of policymakers that Sandy had inspired and mentored , and to hear his children talk with such love and respect as the father they knew .
Sandy was an enthusiastic participant in this Forum , a steadfast friend to Israel , and the recipient of an honorary degree from Tel Aviv University .
Martin wrote a lovely tribute to Sandy called The man who never gave up hope for Arab-Israeli peace .
And he 's right , Sandy never gave up on peace .
He ever gave up on the potential for diplomacy to end even the most intractable of conflicts .
Before I turn to this challenge and how we can and must take the U . S . -Israel relationship to the next level , let me say a few words about events in our own country .
These past few days , all of us have tried to make sense of yet another senseless terrorist attack .
I know that Americans are anxious and fearful . We have reason to be , the threat is real .
The need for action is urgent . Our intelligence and law enforcement agencies will continue learning about what led to the massacre in San Bernardino , just as French and Belgian authorities are doing in Paris and Brussels .
But this much we do know : the threat from radical jihadism has metastasized and become more complex and challenging .
We 're seeing the results of radicalism not just in far-off lands but right here at home , fueled by the Internet .
It 's the nexus of terrorism and technology and we have a lot of work to do to end it .
As hard as this is , Americans now have to move from fear to resolve .
America has beaten bigger threats before , and we will defeat this one as well .
Resolve means depriving jihadists of virtual territory just as we work to deprive them of actual territory .
They are using websites , social media , chat rooms , and other platforms to celebrate beheadings , recruit future terrorists , and call for attacks .
We should work with host companies to shut them down .
It 's time for an urgent dialogue between the government and not just our government , but government and the high-tech community to confront this problem together .
I heard from some of you that you had a great session about technology yesterday .
And about how politics and society kind of go on in a linear way and there 's an upward movement , but how technology is a disruptive force , that leads to a real exponential increase in activity and I think one of the experts on a panel said ISIS is an exponential force right now .
Unfortunately , I agree with that . And that 's why it requires us to bring together governments and high-tech experts to figure out how we disrupt them .
Resolve means supporting also our first responders , like the officer in San Bernardino who said he would take a bullet for the civilians he was rescuing .
We owe them our support and gratitude and whatever help they need .
Local law enforcement should get the support , training , and coordination they need in their communities from counterterrorism experts in Washington .
It also means taking a close look at the safeguards in visa programs and working more effectively with our European allies on intelligence and information sharing .
And , yes , Congress must act to ensure that no one who is a suspected terrorist can buy guns anywhere in America .
Resolve also means cutting off the finances that fuel the global jihadist network and demanding that our partners in the Gulf do so as well .
Resolve means going after the threat at its source in Iraq and Syria and beyond , and I 'll have more to say about that in a minute .
So we must act with courage and clarity . And I think it 's important to remind ourselves that Islam itself is not our adversary .
This is not , and we should not let it become a clash of civilizations .
It is a clash between hate and hope . And the vast majority of Muslims are on our side of the battle unless we drive them away .
We can't buy into the very narrative that radical jihadists use to recruit new followers or alienate partners we want and need at home and abroad with reckless rhetoric .
Declaring war on Islam or demonizing the Muslim-American community is not only counter to our values , it plays right into the hands of terrorists .
Muslim-Americans are our neighbors , co-workers , loved ones , friends .
Many are working every day all over our country to prevent radicalization .
We should be supporting them , not scapegoating them . But at the same time , none of us can close our eyes to the fact that we do face enemies who use Islam to justify slaughtering innocent people .
We have to stop them and we will . Radical jihadists , like so many adversaries in our history , underestimate the strength of our national character .
Americans will not cower or cave . And we will not turn on each other or turn on our principles .
We will defeat those who threaten us . We will keep our country safe and strong , free and tolerant .
And we will always defend our friends and allies . Today with stand with France , Nigeria , Lebanon , Iraq , Turkey , everywhere radical jihadists threaten .
And , yes , we stand with our ally and true friend Israel now and forever .
And of course Israel is no stranger to terrorism . I 've sat in Israeli hospital rooms and held the hands of victims wounded by terrorist attacks , listening to doctors as they sometimes even showed me x-rays , describe how much shrapnel was left in a leg , arm , or a head .
Today Israel faces growing threats in its own neighborhood . An ISIS affiliate across Israel 's border in the Sinai is becoming more aggressive and sophisticated .
It is responsible for the destruction of a Russian airliner with 224 passengers .
And Israeli media reported last week that an ISIS commander from the Sinai visited Gaza , raising the stakes even higher .
There 's also a new wave of violence inside Israel itself .
Brutal stabbings , shootings , and vehicle attacks that seek to sow fear among the innocent .
Israeli children have been killed as have Palestinian children . Just two weeks ago , terrorists murdered an American yeshiva student named Ezra Schwartz in a drive-by shooting .
These knifings and other attacks are terrorism and they must be stopped immediately .
So also must irresponsible rhetoric used to stoke tensions or spur violence .
Palestinian leaders should condemn and combat incitement in all its forms .
The right to be safe is not just the right of Americans but the right of Israelis and Palestinians alike .
In this period of peril , Israel needs a strong America by its side .
And America needs a strong and secure Israel by our side .
It 's in our national interest to have an Israel that remains a bastion of stability and a core ally in a region in chaos .
We need a brave democracy whose perseverance and pluralism are a rebuke to every extremist and tyrant .
We need a light unto the nations as darkness threatens .
Today , three trends in the region and the world are converging and making our alliance with Israel more indispensable than ever .
The first is a rising tide of extremism across a wide arc of instability from North Africa to South Asia .
The second is Iran 's continued aggression . And the third is the growing effort to delegitimize Israel on the world stage .
America and Israel need to address these threats together . And we must take an already strong relationship to the next level .
We have to develop a common strategic vision and pursue a coordinated approach .
Deepen our cooperation and consultation across the board . Remind our peoples how much they have in common .
And keep our relationship always above partisan politics . So we need to see how our challenges intersect and see the whole chessboard .
I want to say a few words about each of the converging trends .
First , the rise of ISIS and the struggle against radical jihadism .
Our security and the security of free people everywhere depends on waging and winning this fight .
Our goal must not to deter or contain ISIS . Our goal must be to defeat ISIS . I have put forth a three-prong plan to do that .
One : Deny ISIS territory in Iraq and Syria by leading an intensified air campaign and working with local and regional forces on the ground .
Second , dismantle the global infrastructure of terror , the networks that supply radical jihadists with money , weapons , and fighters , and stop them from recruiting and inspiring .
And third : Toughen our defenses at home and those of our partners
against external and homegrown threats . As part of our ongoing war against terrorist organizations , we 've been operating under an authorization to use military force since 9/11 .
I think the time has come to update that authorization to ensure that we have the tools we need not only to fight ISIS but all international networks of terrorists .
That effort has stalled , and I hope that the President and Congress will pick it back up .
There is no alternative to American leadership . But the entire world must be part of this fight , and I welcome the new commitments from the United Kingdom , Germany , and others in recent days .
Now , an effective fight on the ground against ISIS is essential , but that does not mean deploying tens of thousands of American combat troops .
It does means stepping up efforts to get more Arab and Kurdish fighters into the fight against ISIS on both sides of the Iraq-Syrian border .
Supporting the Iraqi security forces while pressuring Baghdad to pursue a more inclusive and effective approach is essential .
And immediately deploying the Special Operations forces that President Obama has already authorized with more to follow as more Syrians get into the fight .
We also have to demand that our Arab and Turkish partners carry their share of the burden , with military , financial , and diplomatic contributions .
We will do our part , but it 's their fight , too , and they need to act .
Now I 'm glad Turkey in particular has pledged to step up , now it needs to follow through , including by sealing its border .
Dealing with the conflict in Syria with respect to Assad is central to this whole effort .
We need to continue Secretary Kerry 's efforts to move toward a diplomatic solution to the civil war in Syria that paves the way for new leadership , and enables Syrians from every community to take on ISIS . Investing the Russians in this outcome , and getting them to step up and do their part , will be difficult but essential .
We have to pursue a transition away from Assad and an intensified fight ISIS simultaneously .
We 're not going to get Syrian opposition forces to fight ISIS in earnest without the credible prospect of a transition .
And that 's going to take more pressure and leverage .
That 's one of the reasons why I 've proposed creating a no fly zone and safe havens , as well as more robust support for opposition forces .
We also have to do more to support Syria 's neighbors , especially Jordan and Lebanon , as they take in massive numbers of refugees fleeing both ISIS and Assad , so instability doesn't spread .
And finally , it 's crucial that we embed our mission to defeat ISIS within a broader struggle against radical jihadism .
Extremist groups like ISIS feed off instability and conflict , and there is no shortage of that in the Middle East today .
Decades of repression , poverty corruption , a lack of pluralism and tolerance , turned the region into a powder keg .
Now we have long faced hard choices in the Middle East about how to balance our interest in working with any reliable partner , even those who don't share our values , with our commitment to democratic principles and human rights .
Those dilemmas aren't going away , and we can't forget that lasting security and stability will only come with real reform that provides more space in both the economy and the political system for more people .
That 's why we have to work with our friends and partners to support economic and political modernization and train effective and accountable local intelligence , law enforcement , and counterterrorism services .
And , once and for all , the Saudis , the Qataris , the Kuwaitis and others must stop their citizens from funding extremist organizations , and stop supporting radical schools and mosques around the world that have set too many young people on a path toward extremism .
The second trend that makes a strengthened U . S-Israeli relationship essential is Iran 's increasingly aggressive regional ambitions .
Tehran 's fingerprints are on nearly every conflict across the Middle East .
Iran supports bad actors from Syria to Lebanon to Yemen and beyond .
The Iranian Revolutionary Guard and its proxies are attempting to establish a beachhead on the Golan from which to threaten Israel .
In Southern Lebanon , Hezbollah is amassing an arsenal of rockets and artillery .
And the Ayatollahs continue to threaten Israel 's destruction at every opportunity .
We all agree that Iran can never be allowed to obtain a nuclear weapon .
Now , as you know , I support the nuclear agreement negotiated by the world 's great powers .
Is it perfect ? No , no agreement like that ever is .
But I believe that if it is aggressively implemented and enforced , this deal will help us prevent a nuclear-armed Iran .
That said , it is not enough to say yes to this deal .
We have to say yes and we will vigorously enforce it .
Yes and we will embed it in a larger effort to counter Iran across the region .
How we handle enforcement in these early months will set the tone for years to come , so we have to get it right .
Our message to Iran must be unequivocal . There will be consequences for even small violations and we are ready to snap back sanctions into place .
Our approach must be distrust and verify . There can be no doubt in Tehran that if we see any indication that Iran 's leaders are violating their commitment in the deal not to seek , develop or acquire any nuclear weapons we will stop them .
And we will make sure the Iranians and the world understand that the United States will act decisively if necessary , including taking military action .
And we should also should hold Iran and its Revolutionary Guard Corps accountable for their sponsorship of terrorism , ballistic missile development , human rights violations , detention of Americans , and other illicit behavior like cybercrime .
Now make no mistake , Iran will test our resolve .
They have already started to do so , with a ballistic missile test and other provocative behavior .
We have to respond to these provocations , including with further sanctions designations as necessary .
The third trend is the growing effort around the world to isolate and delegitimize Israel .
This is not a new challenge . As Secretary of State , I called out systemic , structural anti-Israel bias at the UN and fought to block the one-sided Goldstone Report .
Particularly at a time when anti-Semitism is on the rise across the world , especially in Europe , we need to repudiate efforts to malign and undermine Israel and the Jewish people .
The Boycott , Divestment , and Sanctions movement , known as BDS , is the latest front in this battle .
Demonizing Israeli scientists and intellectuals , even young students . Comparing Israel to South African apartheid .
Now no nation , no nation , is above criticism , but this is wrong and it should stop immediately .
Some proponents of BDS may hope that pressuring Israel will lead to peace .
Well that 's wrong too . No outside force is going to resolve the conflict between the Israelis and Palestinians .
Only a two-state solution can provide Palestinians independence , sovereignty and dignity , and provide Israelis the secure and recognized borders of a democratic , Jewish state .
Now , it 's no secret that the most recent efforts to advance direct negotiations didn't yield much tangible progress .
But I remain convinced and I think it 's important we all remain convinced , that peace is possible .
So I refuse to give up on the goal of two states for two people .
And no matter how unattainable it may seem at the moment , Israelis and Palestinians shouldn't give up on it either .
Instead , they should demand that their leaders seek every opportunity to demonstrate their commitment .
Inaction is not an option . And a one-state solution is no solution .
It is a prescription for endless conflict . Israelis deserve security , recognition , and a normal life free from terror .
And Palestinians should be able to govern themselves in their own state , in peace and dignity .
Now for most Americans , it is hard to imagine the reality that exists for many Palestinians and recently for Israelis .
So as difficult as this is , we need to look for opportunities to move forward together .
Everyone has to do their part to create the conditions for progress by taking positive actions that can rebuild trust and by avoiding damaging actions , including with respect to settlements .
And at the same time we should also oppose any unilateral action at the United Nations .
Now I know that sometimes this process can start to feel like that famous definition of insanity , doing the same thing over and over again and expecting a different result .
But circumstances do change . And most importantly , demographics change .
Technology changes . Geopolitics changes . Today , in the Middle East , Israel and its Arab neighbors find that many of their strategic interests are increasingly aligned .
That creates room for greater coordination . Neither Israel nor its Arab neighbors want to see Iran increase its influence in the region or violent jihadists gain footholds .
So we should encourage more intelligence sharing and security cooperation like the quiet partnership between Israel and Egypt to stabilize the Sinai .
And you may have seen that Israel plans to open a diplomatic mission in the UAE to participate in the International Renewable Energy Agency , which I was proud to support locating in Abu Dhabi .
Imagine how that kind of step could be followed by broader diplomatic engagement .
Converging interests between Israel and key Arab states may make it possible to promote progress on the Israeli-Palestinian issue , and clearly progress between Israelis and Palestinians could contribute toward greater cooperation between Israel and Arabs .
Right now , Arab leaders could send a powerful message by reviving and updating the Arab Peace Initiative and laying out a process for normalizing relations with Israel and accepting it as a Jewish state alongside an independent Palestine .
And Israel could seize the opportunity to directly respond to such an initiative .
This is no magic wand , but there 's a real strategic opportunity worth exploring .
That said , it 's also time to stop pretending that solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will solve all of the Middle East 's problems .
For too long Arab states have used the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as an excuse to avoid facing their own challenges at home .
The people of the region have shown that they will no longer accept this .
Their leaders should drop the excuses and pick up the pace of getting their own houses in order .
And as they do , the United States will support them .
We should reaffirm that the Gulf is a region of vital interest to America and commit to sustaining a robust military relationship with our partners there to defend against radical jihadism and Iranian aggression in any form .
So if you add it all up , radical jihadism on the rise , Iran seeking to extend its reach , efforts to delegitimize Israel , we can see how crucial it is for the United States and Israel to stand together closer than ever .
And we can see how Israel 's search for security , stability , and peace goes hand-in-hand with the broader effort the United States must lead to secure and stabilize the Middle East .
Now , we know our governments have had their share of disagreements in recent years .
But the relationship has always been stronger and deeper than the headlines might lead you to believe .
Under President Obama , we achieved unprecedented defense and intelligence collaboration and supported the development of the Iron Dome air defense system , which saved many Israeli lives when Hamas rockets began to fly from Gaza .
As Secretary of State , I worked with the Israeli government to negotiate a cease-fire that ended those rocket attacks in 2012 and vigorously defended Israel at the UN and in other international bodies .
Now , as I 've said , it 's time , it 's the time to take our alliance to the next level .
A centerpiece of that effort must be ensuring that Israel continues to maintain its qualitative military edge .
The United States should help further bolster Israeli air defenses , including to cover Israel 's north , and make it a top priority to develop better tunnel detection technology to prevent arms smuggling and kidnapping .
And we need to ensure that a new 10-year defense memorandum of understanding sends a clear message to Israel 's enemies that they will never prevail .
But we all know that our common security commitments are about more than lists of weapons or dollars and cents .
They are about understanding each other . Acting together . Being on the same page .
So let 's expand high-level U . S . -Israel strategic consultations .
Bring our best minds together for deeper discussions about enforcing the nuclear deal , countering Iran 's regional ambitions , and developing new defense technologies for the future .
If Israel and the United States stand shoulder-to-shoulder and present a united front to the region and the world , I am confident we can meet the threats and challenges we face today .
I was born just a few months before the State of Israel and my generation came of age admiring the talent and tenacity of the Israeli people .
We marveled as they coaxed a dream into reality out of the harsh desert soil , and built a thriving , raucous democracy in a region full of adversaries and autocrats determined to push Israel into the sea .
We watched a small nation fight fearlessly for its right to exist .
And Israel 's pursuit of peace was as inspiring as its prowess in war .
It was one of the great honors of my life to call Yitzhak Rabin a friend and to witness that historic handshake on the White House lawn .
Many Americans feel a deep emotional connection with Israel . In its story we see some of our own , and the story of all people who struggle for freedom and self-determination .
We see a homeland for people long oppressed , and a thriving economy that is a model for how innovation , entrepreneurship , and freedom can deliver prosperity even in unforgiving circumstances .
So we are two nations woven together . Lands built by immigrants and exiles seeking to live and worship in freedom , given life by democratic principles , and sustained by the service and sacrifice of generations of patriots .
Yet even with all this history , even with all our common interests and shared values , none of us can or should take this relationship for granted .
With every passing year , we must tie the bonds tighter .
Reach out to the next generation , we can bring them with us and do the hard necessary work of friendship .
Because there is a new generation in both countries today that does not remember that shared past .
Young Americans who didn't see Israel in a fight for survival again and again .
Young Israelis who didn't see the United States broker peace at Camp David or kindle hope at Oslo or stand behind Israel when it was attacked .
They are growing up in a different world . And the future of our relationship depends on building new ties for a new time .
Ben Gurion once said , In Israel , in order to be a realist you must believe in miracles .
Well , tonight is the first night of Chanukah , when the Jewish people in Israel and all over the world praise the Almighty for the miracles for the redemption , for the mighty deeds , for the saving acts .
This season and this moment in history is a time once again for mighty deeds and saving acts .
For us to rededicate and renew our great alliance . For us once again to light candles of hope that will shine through the darkness for our peoples and all peoples , if we do it together .
Thank you all very much . Wow . Well , I 'll tell you what , it is a thrill to be live at the Apollo .
It is wonderful to be back home in New York .
It 's just extraordinary to stand here and look out at this crowd .
Please be seated . We can jump up from time to time .
I am sitting here , standing here actually , looking out and seeing so many friends , so many people I 've worked with , I 've had the privilege of knowing .
It 's a special treat to have my former colleague and partner , someone who I hope and expect will not only be the leader of the Democrats in the Senate , if we do our part , he will be the majority leader .
We did have eight years working side by side , dealing with the problems and opportunities , and that experience was one of the great honors of my life .
I also want to acknowledge my longtime friend , the person that I actually give credit to for starting me on this journey .
That is Congressman Charlie Rangel . I also see the Manhattan borough president , Gale Brewer , and to all the other elected officials , friends , supporters , I love coming to Harlem .
This community has made me and my family feel like part of your family , and I 'm so grateful for your support and friendship .
With your help , we 're going to win the primary here on April 19 , and then we 're going to win the Democratic nomination and the election in November .
Now let me just give you a short summary of where we are .
I 've competed across our country . I am honored to have received nearly 9 million votes .
That is more than a million that Donald Trump has received , and two and a half million more than Senator Sanders .
So we 're on the right track . But I don't have to tell you this is a wild election year .
I am not taking anything or anyone for granted . We 're going work for every vote in every part of this state just like I did when I ran for the Senate .
Because New Yorkers took a chance on me , and I will never forget that .
You have always had my back and I have always tried to have yours .
When I think back at those eight eventful years that I served you , there were some hard times weren't there ?
But we pulled together . None of us who lived through 9/11 and its aftermath will ever forget the lives lost , lower Manhattan in ruins , toxic dust and debris raining down , and the many examples of heroism we saw firefighters and police officers who risked their lives to help save others ; the construction workers and emergency personnel and volunteers who spent long hours on the smoldering pile searching for survivors ; and then months more clearing the site .
All of the New Yorkers who lined up to donate blood , who reached out to families in a million quiet , decent ways .
They projected a sense of strength and unity that comforted a whole country .
And as the dust settled , New Yorkers rolled up our sleeves and we got to work .
Like former fire commissioner Nick Scoppetta , who we lost just last week .
He was a great leader during that difficult time . Always a champion for his firefighters , for children and for the city .
New York wanted to rebuild , so Chuck and I fought for federal funding to get it done .
And we can see the results now as Lower Manhattan has risen even higher and more magnificently .
When first responders and others started suffering adverse health effects from 9/11 , a lot of people in Washington didn't want to pay any attention .
I kept raising the alarm . I held a hearing that tried to get the attention of the EPA and the Bush administration .
They just brushed us off , acting as though it wasn't anything out of the ordinary .
Then I got to work with our congressional delegation to get our first responders and others the health care they needed .
It was really important to me . I am so grateful that the Zadroga Act is now ensuring that people who did so much for us , will be taken care of for their entire lives .
But while all this was going on , the Republicans , led by George Bush , started squandering the surplus they 'd inherited from my husband 's two terms on massive tax cuts for the wealthy .
They set a reckless fiscal and regulatory course that eventually tanked our entire economy .
Trickle-down economics made life harder for working people here in our state .
So we had to get creative , didn't we ? We worked with small businesses to help them use technology to reach new customers ; with upstate cities to attract new high-tech research projects to create more good-paying jobs .
I even connected chefs and restaurant owners from New York City with farmers and wine makers in the Hudson Valley and Finger Lakes .
We were looking for anything that could make more jobs , more markets , more opportunities .
And we fought for new investments for poor communities and support for teachers and schools so all of our kids could get a good education no matter what ZIP code they live in .
Children in every borough of this city deserve the same chance to succeed as children in Westchester or on Long Island or anywhere else in America .
Because for me , it 's really simple . When we invest in our children 's education , we invest in our country 's future and in a stronger economy for all of us .
One of the things I love about New York is New Yorkers have always believed that if you work hard and you do your part , you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead .
That is how I saw my job as your senator .
My job was to help make that possible for as many people as I could .
Boy , did I learn a lot serving the people of this state .
Now I am once again asking for your confidence and your vote .
I think the easiest way to describe what my campaign is it 's about breaking down the barriers that are holding people back from sharing the promise of America .
And here 's what I will do . Anyone running for president this year faces three big tests .
First , can you deliver results that improve people 's lives ?
Second , can you keep us safe ? Third , can you bring our country together ?
Every candidate should be judged by these tests , because making a real difference for people and families comes first .
Americans everywhere are hungry for solutions . We can create more good jobs with rising incomes by investing in manufacturing and small business and infrastructure and clean energy , enough clean energy to power every home in America in 10 years .
And here 's how I see it : We 'll make companies that ship jobs overseas give back the tax breaks they got here at home .
If they try to move their headquarters to a foreign country to skip out on their tax bills , we 'll slap a new exit tax on them .
Then we 'll put that money to work in the communities and people left behind .
We can break down barriers holding back parents and families in this economy .
Isn't it time for quality , affordable child care , early childhood education , and paid family leave ?
Isn't it time for raising the minimum wage nationwide ? And isn't it time finally to guarantee equal pay for the work women do ?
I think we 're lucky in New York because these are goals that Governor Cuomo and Mayor de Blasio are fighting for and achieving here , and I will fight for them as president .
You know , the Republicans always say , when I talk about this , that I 'm playing the gender card .
My response is pretty simple : If fighting for equal pay and paid leave is playing the gender card , then deal me in .
Now I also think we can break down the barriers holding back our young people , especially the burden of student debt that makes it so hard for them .
Under my plan , you won't have to borrow a dime for tuition at any public college or university .
And you 'll be able to refinance the debt you already have just like a mortgage or a car loan .
That my friends , will save millions of people thousands of dollars .
We can also break down the barriers of systemic racism and discrimination .
We can invest in communities of color , reform our broken criminal justice system , and replace the school-to-prison pipeline with a cradle-to-college pipeline .
We can reject discrimination against LGBT people like the shameful law passed in North Carolina .
We can defend all our rights our civil rights and voting rights , workers ' rights and women 's rights , gay rights , rights for people with disabilities .
We 're not going to let the Republicans turn us back and rip away the progress we have made .
And that starts by standing with President Obama in demanding that Republican senators do their jobs and vote on his nominee to the Supreme Court .
So , I believe we can break down all these barriers and more if we stand together , if we work together .
And for me , it 's all about getting results .
When I joined with parents and doctors and community leaders to take on the epidemic of children 's asthma right here in Harlem , it wasn't about making a point ; it was about making a difference .
And as your senator and in every job I 've ever held , I 've worked my heart out to even the odds that have often been stacked against too many people .
Now , some folks may have the luxury to hold out for the perfect , but a lot of Americans are hurting right now and they can't wait for that .
They need the good and they need it today . When we get knocked down like you do in life and in politics , you have to get right back up and keep on working to make people 's lives better .
And when the insurance industry blocked our push for universal health care for every American , as Chuck said , I partnered with Republicans and Democrats to create the Children 's Health Insurance Program .
That helped a lot of kids and families here in New York and 8 million children across America .
When any candidate comes before you , that candidate owes it to you to be clear about how we 're actually going to deliver .
Now my opponent and I share many of the same goals , but some of his ideas for how to get there won't pass , others just won't work because the numbers don't add up .
That means , people aren't going to get the help that they need and deserve .
And that 's what this is supposed to be about .
Now , my opponent says , well , we 're just not thinking big enough .
Well , this is New York . Nobody dreams bigger than we do , but this this is a city that likes to get things done , and that 's what we want from our president too .
We need a president who will help break down all of the barriers holding back Americans , not just some .
I take a back seat to no one in taking on income inequality .
I know how important it is to close that gap , to rebuild the middle class , but I 'll tell you this
: It 's also important to take on racial inequality and discrimination in all of its forms .
It 's important to stand up to the gun lobby and fight for commonsense gun safety reforms .
I remember that meeting that Chuck was talking about . People were getting cold feet .
Folks talk about all the powerful lobbies in Washington , and look , there are a bunch of them .
But nothing , no one is more powerful than the gun lobby .
So I understood why some members of Congress are saying , oh my gosh , we can't do this , and some folks in the White House and the administration were getting nervous .
But I thought then and I believe now , whatever we can do to save lives , we must do it .
And I remember how hard it was to get the Brady bill passed .
My opponent voted against it five times , as I recall .
He has sided with the NRA on the important votes of the last 20 years .
And this isn't a single-issue country , so we need a president who can do all parts of the job .
Because the second test is keeping us safe . And at a time when the terrorists are plotting new attacks , and countries like Russia and China and Iran are making aggressive moves , protecting America 's national security can't be an afterthought .
Our next president has to be just as passionate about defending our people and our country as about fixing our economy .
I will do both , because when you vote here in New York on April 19 , you are voting for a president and Commander-in-Chief .
And let 's face it , on the Republican side , what we 're hearing is truly scary .
When Donald Trump talks casually about using torture and allowing more countries to get nuclear weapons , or when Ted Cruz calls for treating American Muslims like criminals and racially profiling predominantly Muslim neighborhoods that doesn't make them sound strong ; it makes them sound in over their heads .
You know , loose cannons tend to misfire , and in a dangerous world that 's not a gamble we can afford .
But the test that the Republican candidates fails most spectacularly when we get to the third test .
Because instead of bringing us together , they seem determined to divide us even further .
Their entire campaigns are based on pitting us versus them .
One of my personal heroines , Maya Angelou said she said a lot that is worth remembering , but she said this : When someone shows you who they are , believe them .
These Republican candidates are showing us exactly who they are and what they will do as president , and we should believe them .
Just listen to Donald Trump , he plays coy with white supremacists .
He says demeaning and degrading things about women . He wants to round up millions of Latino immigrants and kick them out of the United States a nation built by immigrants .
He wants to ban all Muslims from entering America a country founded on religious freedom .
It 's cynical , it 's wrong , and it goes against everything New York and America stand for .
One of the great joys of my time as senator was traveling across this city and this state .
New York is home to 20 million people . We don't all look the same , we don't all sound the same or worship the same either .
But we pull together . And when a candidate for president says we can solve America 's problems by building walls , discriminating against people based on their religion , and turning against each other .
Well , New Yorkers know better . Our diversity is a strength , not a weakness .
New York represents the best of America , and together we can face down the worst .
Look around you . You 'll see a rising generation of young people more diverse , empowering , and connected than any we have ever seen .
We should build on that spirit , not squash it , and I believe with all my heart that if we reach for more love and kindness , instead of bluster and bigotry , there 's nothing we can't do if we put our minds to it .
Let me leave you with one story that says it all .
Mohammed Solomon Angani was born in Pakistan and moved to America with his parents when he was 13 months old .
They were like any other New York family . Mom was a middle school teacher , dad owned a store .
Mohammed grew up , studied biochemistry at Queens College , got trained as a paramedic , and became a cadet with the NYPD . He wasn't sure what he wanted to do with his life , but he knew he wanted to help .
He was just 23 when terrorists flew planes into the World Trade Center .
When he heard the news , Mohammed didn't hesitate , he grabbed his medical bag and headed straight to the site .
Like so many others that day , he died trying to save total strangers .
But because his body was buried deep under the rubble , neither his family nor the police department knew what had happened to him .
For months he was considered missing . Some wondered if this young man with a Muslim name and a background in science could have had anything to do with the attacks .
The tabloids piled on . But once Mohammed 's body was found , everyone realized how wrong they had gotten it .
He wasn't a suspect . He wasn't a terrorist . He was a hero .
So , New York gave Mohammed a hero 's funeral with full police honors .
Because , as his mother said , this cadet and paramedic ran toward the burning towers when everyone else was running away .
Mohammed was an immigrant , he was a New Yorker , he was an American , and he died trying to help others live .
It 's up to us to make sure that his and so many others ' sacrifice still counts for something .
We do that by standing up against bigotry in all forms ; by celebrating heroism wherever we find it and by doing our part to serve others and make our communities better and stronger .
That 's what countless New Yorkers do every day in a million quiet ways .
So we 're going to stand up for the values that make New York great and make America great .
And don't forget , don't ever forget , this is the greatest country on earth .
And we 're going to fight for it fight for our future .
Please join me in this campaign . Go to hillaryclinton.com .
Text join to 47246 . Let 's have each other 's back , lift each over , and break down all the barriers holding us back from realizing the potential we can have in our county .
Thank you all so much . Thank you so much .
I am absolutely delighted to be back here at Columbia .
I want to thank President Bollinger , Dean Janow , and everyone at the School of International and Public Affairs .
It is a special treat to be here with and on behalf of a great leader of this city and our country , David Dinkins .
He has made such an indelible impact on New York , and I had the great privilege of working with him as first lady and then , of course , as a new senator .
When I was just starting out as a senator , David 's door was always open .
He and his wonderful wife Joyce were great friends and supporters and good sounding boards about ideas that we wanted to consider to enhance the quality of life and the opportunities for the people of this city .
I was pleased to address the Dinkins Leadership and Public Policy Forum in my first year as a senator , and I so appreciated then , as I have in the years since , David 's generosity with his time and , most of all , his wisdom .
So , 14 years later , I 'm honored to have this chance , once again , to help celebrate the legacy of one of New York 's greatest public servants .
I 'm pleased too that you will have the opportunity after my remarks to hear from such a distinguished panel , to go into more detail about some of the issues that we face .
I also know that Manhattan Borough President Gale Brewer is here , along with other local and community leaders .
Because surely this is a time when our collective efforts to devise approaches to the problems that still afflict us is more important than ever .
Indeed , it is a time for wisdom . For yet again , the family of a young black man is grieving a life cut short .
Yet again , the streets of an American city are marred by violence .
By shattered glass and shouts of anger and shows of force .
Yet again a community is reeling , its fault lines laid bare and its bonds of trust and respect frayed .
Yet again , brave police officers have been attacked in the line of duty .
What we 've seen in Baltimore should , indeed does , tear at our soul .
And , from Ferguson to Staten Island to Baltimore , the patterns have become unmistakable and undeniable .
Walter Scott shot in the back in Charleston , South Carolina .
Unarmed . In debt . And terrified of spending more time in jail for child support payments he couldn't afford .
Tamir Rice shot in a park in Cleveland , Ohio .
Unarmed and just 12 years old . Eric Garner choked to death after being stopped for selling cigarettes on the streets of this city .
And now Freddie Gray . His spine nearly severed while in police custody .
Not only as a mother and a grandmother but as a citizen , a human being , my heart breaks for these young men and their families .
We have to come to terms with some hard truths about race and justice in America .
There is something profoundly wrong when African American men are still far more likely to be stopped and searched by police , charged with crimes , and sentenced to longer prison terms than are meted out to their white counterparts .
There is something wrong when a third of all black men face the prospect of prison during their lifetimes .
And an estimated 1.5 million black men are missing from their families and communities because of incarceration and premature death .
There is something wrong when more than one out of every three young black men in Baltimore can't find a job .
There is something wrong when trust between law enforcement and the communities they serve breaks down as far as it has in many of our communities .
We have allowed our criminal justice system to get out of balance .
And these recent tragedies should galvanize us to come together as a nation to find our balance again .
We should begin by heeding the pleas of Freddie Gray 's family for peace and unity , echoing the families of Michael Brown , Trayvon Martin , and others in the past years .
Those who are instigating further violence in Baltimore are disrespecting the Gray family and the entire community .
They are compounding the tragedy of Freddie Gray 's death and setting back the cause of justice .
So the violence has to stop . But , more broadly , let 's remember that everyone in every community benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone in every community is respected by the law .
That is what we have to work towards in Baltimore and across our country .
We must urgently begin to rebuild the bonds of trust and respect among Americans .
Between police and citizens , yes , but also across society .
Restoring trust in our politics , our press , our markets .
Between and among neighbors and even people with whom we disagree politically .
This is so fundamental to who we are as a nation and everything we want to achieve together .
It truly is about how we treat each other and what we value .
Making it possible for every American to reach his or her God-given potential regardless of who you are , where you were born , or who you love .
The inequities that persist in our justice system undermine this shared vision of what America can be and should be .
I learned this firsthand as a young attorney just out of law school at one of those law schools that will remain nameless here at Columbia .
One of my earliest jobs for the Children 's Defense Fund , which David had mentioned I was so fortunate to work with Marian Wright Edelman as a young lawyer and then serving on the board of the Children 's Defense Fund was studying the problem then of youth , teenagers , sometimes preteens , incarcerated in adult jails .
Then , as director of the University of Arkansas School of Law 's legal aid clinic , I advocated on behalf of prison inmates and poor families .
I saw repeatedly how our legal system can be and all too often is stacked against those who have the least power , who are the most vulnerable .
I saw how families could be and were torn apart by excessive incarceration .
I saw the toll on children growing up in homes shattered by poverty and prison .
So , unfortunately , I know these are not new challenges by any means .
In fact they have become even more complex and urgent over time .
And today they demand fresh thinking and bold action from all of us .
Today there seems to be a growing bipartisan movement for commonsense reforms in our criminal justice systems .
Senators as disparate on the political spectrum as Cory Booker and Rand Paul and Dick Durbin and Mike Lee are reaching across the aisle to find ways to work together .
It is rare to see Democrats and Republicans agree on anything today .
But we 're beginning to agreeing on this : We need to restore balance to our criminal justice system .
Now , of course , it is not enough just to agree and give speeches about it we actually have to work together to get the job done .
We need to deliver real reforms that can be felt on our streets , in our courthouses , and our jails and prisons , in communities too long neglected .
Let me touch on two areas in particular where I believe we need to push for more progress .
First , we need smart strategies to fight crime that help restore trust between law enforcement and our communities , especially communities of color .
There 's a lot of good work to build on .
Across the country , there are so many police officers out there every day inspiring trust and confidence , honorably doing their duty , putting themselves on the line to save lives .
There are police departments already deploying creative and effective strategies , demonstrating how we can protect the public without resorting to unnecessary force .
We need to learn from those examples , build on what works .
We can start by making sure that federal funds for state and local law enforcement are used to bolster best practices , rather than to buy weapons of war that have no place on our streets .
President Obama 's task force on policing gives us a good place to start .
Its recommendations offer a roadmap for reform , from training to technology , guided by more and better data .
We should make sure every police department in the country has body cameras to record interactions between officers on patrol and suspects .
That will improve transparency and accountability , it will help protect good people on both sides of the lens .
For every tragedy caught on tape , there surely have been many more that remained invisible .
Not every problem can be or will be prevented with cameras , but this is a commonsense step we should take .
The President has provided the idea of matching funds to state and local governments investing in body cameras .
We should go even further and make this the norm everywhere .
And we should listen to law enforcement leaders who are calling for a renewed focus on working with communities to prevent crime , rather than measuring success just by the number of arrests or convictions .
As your senator from New York , I supported a greater emphasis on community policing , along with putting more officers on the street to get to know those communities .
David Dinkins was an early pioneer of this policy . His leadership helped lay the foundation for dramatic drops in crime in the years that followed .
And today smart policing in communities that builds relationships , partnerships , and trust makes more sense than ever .
And it shouldn't be limited just to officers on the beat .
It 's an ethic that should extend throughout our criminal justice system .
To prosecutors and parole officers . To judges and lawmakers .
We all share a responsibility to help re-stitch the fabric of our neighborhoods and communities .
We also have to be honest about the gaps that exist across our country , the inequality that stalks our streets .
Because you cannot talk about smart policing and reforming the criminal justice system if you also don't talk about what 's needed to provide economic opportunity , better educational chances for young people , more support to families so they can do the best jobs they are capable of doing to help support their own children .
Today I saw an article on the front page of USA Today that really struck me , written by a journalist who lives in Baltimore .
And here 's what I read three times to make sure I was reading correctly :
At a conference in 2013 at Johns Hopkins University , Vice Provost Jonathan Bagger pointed out that only six miles separate the Baltimore neighborhoods of Roland Park and Hollins Market .
But there is a 20-year difference in the average life expectancy .
We have learned in the last few years that life expectancy , which is a measure of the quality of life in communities and countries , manifests the same inequality that we see in so many other parts of our society .
Women white women without high school education are losing life expectancy .
Black men and black women are seeing their life expectancy goes down in so many parts of our country .
This may not grab headlines , although I was glad to see it on the front page of USA Today .
But it tells us more than I think we can bear about what we are up against .
We need to start understanding how important it is to care for every single child as though that child were our own .
David and I started our conversation this morning talking about our grandchildren ; now his are considerably older than mine .
But it was not just two longtime friends catching up with each other .
It was so clearly sharing what is most important to us , as it is to families everywhere in our country .
So I don't want the discussion about criminal justice , smart policing , to be siloed and to permit discussions and arguments and debates about it to only talk about that .
The conversation needs to be much broader . Because that is a symptom , not a cause , of what ails us today .
The second area where we need to chart a new course is how we approach punishment and prison .
It 's a stark fact that the United States has less than 5 percent of the world 's population , yet we have almost 25 percent of the world 's total prison population .
The numbers today are much higher than they were 30 , 40 years ago , despite the fact that crime is at historic lows .
Of the more than 2 million Americans incarcerated today , a significant percentage are low-level offenders : people held for violating parole or minor drug crimes , or who are simply awaiting trial in backlogged courts .
Keeping them behind bars does little to reduce crime . But it is does a lot to tear apart families and communities .
One in every 28 children now has a parent in prison .
Think about what that means for those children . When we talk about one-and-a-half million missing African American men , we 're talking about missing husbands , missing fathers , missing brothers .
They 're not there to look after their children or bring home a paycheck .
And the consequences are profound . Without the mass incarceration that we currently practice , millions fewer people would be living in poverty .
And it 's not just families trying to stay afloat with one parent behind bars .
Of the 600,000 prisoners who reenter society each year , roughly 60 percent face long-term unemployment .
And , for all this , taxpayers are paying about $80 billion a year to keep so many people in prison .
The price of incarcerating a single inmate is often more than $ 30,000 per year and up to $ 60,000 in some states .
That 's the salary of a teacher or police officer .
One year in a New Jersey state prison costs $ 44,000 more than the annual tuition at Princeton .
If the United States brought our correctional expenditures back in line with where they were several decades ago , we 'd save an estimated $28 billion a year .
And I believe we would not be less safe . You can pay a lot of police officers and nurses and others with $28 billion to help us deal with the pipeline issues .
It 's time to change our approach . It 's time to end the era of mass incarceration .
We need a true national debate about how to reduce our prison population while keeping our communities safe .
I don't know all the answers . That 's why I 'm here to ask all the smart people in Columbia and New York to start thinking this through with me .
I know we should work together to pursue together to pursue alternative punishments for low-level offenders .
They do have to be in some way registered in the criminal justice system , but we don't want that to be a fast track to long-term criminal activity , we don't want to create another incarceration generation .
I 've been encouraged to see changes that I supported as senator to reduce the unjust federal sentencing disparity between crack and powder cocaine crimes finally become law .
And last year , the Sentencing Commission reduced recommended prison terms for some drug crimes .
President Obama and former Attorney General Holder have led the way with important additional steps .
And I am looking forward to our new Attorney General , Loretta Lynch , carrying this work forward .
There are other measures that I and so many others have championed to reform arbitrary mandatory minimum sentences are long overdue .
We also need probation and drug diversion programs to deal swiftly with violations , while allowing low-level offenders who stay clean and stay out of trouble to stay out of prison .
I 've seen the positive effects of specialized drug courts and juvenile programs work to the betterment of individuals and communities .
And please , please , let us put mental health back at the top of our national agenda .
You and I know that the promise of de-institutionalizing those in mental health facilities was supposed to be followed by the creation of community-based treatment centers .
Well , we got half of that equation but not the other half .
Our prisons and our jails are now our mental health institutions .
I have to tell you , I was somewhat surprised in both Iowa and New Hampshire to be asked so many questions about mental health .
What are we going to do with people who need help for substance abuse or mental illness ?
What are we going to do when the remaining facilities are being shut down for budget reasons ?
What are we going to do when hospitals don't really get reimbursed for providing the kind of emergency care that is needed for mental health patients ?
It 's not just a problem in our cities . There 's a quiet epidemic of substance abuse sweeping small-town and rural America as well .
We have to do more and finally get serious about treatment .
I 'll be talking about all of this in the months to come , offering new solutions to protect and strengthen our families and communities .
I know in a time when we 're afflicted by shor t-t ermism , we 're not looking over the horizon for the investments that we need to make in our fellow citizens , in our children .
So I 'm well aware that progress will not be easy , despite the emerging bipartisan consensus for certain reforms .
And that we will have to overcome deep divisions and try to begin to replenish our depleted reservoirs of trust .
But I am convinced , as the congenital optimist I must be to live my life , that we can rise to this challenge .
We can heal our wounds . We can restore balance to our justice system and respect in our communities .
And we can make sure that we take actions that are going to make a difference in the lives of those who for too long have been marginalized and forgotten .
Let 's protect the rights of all our people . Let 's take on the broader inequities in our society .
You can't separate out the unrest we see in the streets from the cycles of poverty and despair that hollow out those neighborhoods .
Despite all the progress we 've made in this country lifting people up and it has been extraordinary too many of our fellow citizens are still left out .
Twenty-five years ago , in his inaugural address as mayor , David Dinkins warned of leaving too many lost amidst the wealth and grandeur that surrounds us .
Today , his words and the emotion behind them ring truer than ever .
You don't have to look too far from this magnificent hall to find children still living in poverty or trapped in failing schools .
Families who work hard but can't afford the rising prices in their neighborhood .
Mothers and fathers who fear for their sons ' safety when they go off to school or just to go buy a pack of Skittles .
These challenges are all woven together . And they all must be tackled together .
Our goal must truly be inclusive and lasting prosperity that 's measured by how many families get ahead and stay ahead
How many children climb out of poverty and stay out of prison
How many young people can go to college without breaking the bank
How many new immigrants can start small businesses How many parents can get good jobs that allow them to balance the demands of work and family .
That 's how we should measure prosperity . With all due respect , that is a far better measurement than the size of the bonuses handed out in downtown office buildings .
Now even in the most painful times like those we are seeing in Baltimore
When parents fear for their children When smoke fills the skies above our cities
When police officers are assaulted Even then especially let 's remember the aspirations and values that unite us all : That every person should have the opportunity to succeed .
That no one is disposable . That every life matters .
So yes , Mayor Dinkins . This is a time for wisdom .
A time for honesty about race and justice in America .
And , yes , a time for reform . David Dinkins is a leader we can look to .
We know what he stood for . Let us take the challenge and example he presents and think about what we must do to make sure that this country we love this city we live in are both good and great .
And please join me in saying a prayer for the family of Freddie Gray , and all the men whose names we know and those we don't who have lost their lives unnecessarily and tragically .
And in particular today , include in that prayer the people of Baltimore and our beloved country .
Thank you all very much . Thank you so much Charlie [ Rangel ] .
Thanks for your friendship . Thanks for your leadership . The Congress will miss you when you leave its ranks , but I have a feeling that you are going to be spending a lot of time right here in Harlem .
Charlie didn't tell you the whole story . He was actually the person who called to encourage me to run for the Senate .
He basically said that I had no choice . But it took me a long time before I realized he was right .
He 's been a great friend and partner since then .
I want to tell you how special it is for me to be back here in Harlem to make this set of comments .
I loved representing New York for eight years . And Harlem looms large in the American imagination , as the birthplace of so much art and culture and such vibrant public life .
There 's really no place like it in the world .
I appreciate being joined by the Governor [ Cuomo ] and Sandra , by the Mayor [ De Blasio ] and Chirlane , by the former Attorney General , Eric Holder , Representative Yvette Clark , and Representative Nydia Velzquez , our Council Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito , Public Advocate Letitia James .
I want to thank Dr. Khalil Gibran Muhammad , and to all of the New York State Black , Puerto Rican , Hispanic and Asian caucus members and members of the New York City Council .
The Black , Latino , and Asian Caucus : I thank you all so much for being here .
I want to pick up on what I just said about Harlem , because Harlem , and many other communities across America , remind us that any view of Black America that focuses exclusively on crime , poverty , or other challenges is missing so much .
Missing the strength and the pride and the achievement that is evident on every street here .
That narrative is missing the remarkable rise of the African American middle class , the rise of African American leadership in all walks of life : in business , law , politics , science , the arts , sports , and all the professions .
It 's missing the vibrancy of the black church , the passionate advocacy of the next generation of changemakers , and the service of leaders at every level , who never tire of making others ' lives better .
Earlier today , I spent some time with the heads of nine of America 's historic civil rights groups , hosted by Marc Morial of the National Urban League .
Reverend Al Sharpton attended . And we had a great conversation , because they are working to drive a 21st century agenda for jobs and freedom .
I am grateful for their guidance and wisdom . I am also grateful to be speaking in this building that honors two men who represent just some of the diversity of the African American community .
Arturo Schomburg , who was from the Caribbean , and Langston Hughes , whose ashes are housed here , reminded all of us that when life ain't no crystal stair , you 've got to keep climbing .
That 's a good lesson for everyone . But even as we acknowledge and even celebrate successes , it 's important to remember : There are still very real barriers holding back African Americans from fully participating in our society .
That 's what I am here to talk about today .
Last week on the debate stage in Milwaukee , I said I want to tear down all the barriers that hold back Americans across racial lines , because our country can only live up to its potential when every single American has the chance to live up to theirs .
So I want to talk with you about how we break down the barriers that disproportionately affect African Americans and build ladders of opportunity in their place .
Last week , I went to Flint , Michigan . By now , we all know what 's happening there .
Families , children , babies , drinking poisoned water for nearly two years because their government wanted to save a little money .
It 's a horrifying story , but what makes it even worse is that it 's not a coincidence that this was allowed to happen in a largely black , largely poor community .
Just ask yourself , would this have ever occurred in a wealthy white suburb of Detroit ?
Absolutely not . And as we have learned more about this crisis , we 've seen other barriers holding back the people of Flint coming into clearer focus .
Years of under-investment have left behind a hollowed out community without enough jobs or opportunity for the people living there .
Not enough families have access to the quality education that their children deserve .
And they have too little political power , which left them vulnerable to a state government that ignored and dismissed their concerns .
Just imagine every one of you a parent , a grandparent , an aunt , an uncle going to the authorities holding a bottle of brown , smelly water .
Telling those in authority , There 's something wrong with this water .
My baby has a rash . I feel funny when I drink it or take a bath , and being told ,
There 's nothing wrong with the water . Just go away .
Flint is not alone . There are many Flints across our country : places where people of color and the poor have been left out and left behind .
Now , in the contest for the Democratic nomination , we have spent a lot of time debating about the big banks and the excesses of Wall Street , and these are important issues .
And I am absolutely committed to ensuring that no bank is too big to fail , and no executive too powerful to jail .
But Flint reminds us there 's a lot more going on in our country that we should be concerned about .
The truth is we aren't a single-issue country . We face a complex set of economic , social , and political challenges .
They are intersectional , they are reinforcing , and we have got to take them all on .
So it 's not enough for your economic plan to be , break up the banks .
You also need a serious plan to create jobs , especially in places where unemployment remains stubbornly high .
You need a plan to address the generations of underinvestment and neglect .
Now even if we succeed on raising taxes on every millionaire and billionaire in America and believe me , I do intend to succeed at that we still need to face the painful reality that African Americans are nearly three times as likely as whites to be denied a mortgage .
Something 's wrong when the median wealth for black families is just a tiny fraction of the median wealth of white families .
And when gun violence is by far the leading cause of death for young African American men , outstripping the next nine causes of death combined , there is something deeply wrong .
Something is wrong when African American men are far more likely to be stopped and searched by police , charged with crimes , and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men convicted of the same offenses .
And when black kids get arrested for petty crimes , but white CEO 's get away with fleecing our entire country , there is something wrong .
Just imagine with me , for a minute , if white kids were 500 percent more likely to die from asthma than black kids .
Five hundred percent . Imagine if a white baby in South Carolina were twice as likely to die before her first birthday than an African American baby .
Imagine the outcry . Imagine the resources that would flood in .
Now , these inequities are wrong but they 're also immoral .
And it 'll be the mission of my presidency to bring them to an end .
We have to begin by facing up to the reality of systemic racism .
Because these are not only problems of economic inequality . These are problems of racial inequality .
And we have got to say that loudly and clearly .
Now , I don't by any means intend to imply that we are not still making progress .
We do have a lot to celebrate , as Congressman Rangel said .
The people in this room know that you have helped to make it happen .
And there is no better example of that progression than our president .
And for all the partisan resistance President Obama has faced every day , remember and celebrate he brought our economy back from the brink of another Great Depression .
On his watch , 14 million jobs have been created , health care has been brought to 18 million people , the auto industry was saved , and so much else .
Now , he would be the first to say as we 've heard him say that despite our best efforts and our highest hopes , America 's long struggle with race is far from finished .
For many white Americans , it 's tempting to believe that bigotry is largely behind us .
That would leave us with a lot less work , wouldn't it ?
But more than half a century after Rosa Parks sat and Dr. King marched and John Lewis bled , race still plays a significant role in determining who gets ahead in America and who gets left behind .
Now anyone anyone asking for your vote has a responsibility to grapple with this reality .
To see things as they actually are , not just as we want them to be .
I 'd be the first to admit I don't have all the answers .
I 've made my own mistakes . I 've walked my own journey .
But I believe with all my heart we can and must do better .
We 've made progress before , which gives me hope we can do it again .
In the 1990s , economic programs like the new market tax credit , the earned income tax credit , and empowerment zones like the one right here in Harlem made a real difference in people 's lives .
They helped to create the highest increase in black incomes and the lowest black unemployment in history .
We achieved record small-business lending to minority-owned businesses , and record bank lending in minority communities .
Right here in Harlem , the unemployment rate dropped by two-thirds , and we saw a drop in child poverty and an increase in employment and income for single mothers , too .
We also learned about what doesn't work . Some of what we tried didn't resolve problems .
Some ended up creating new ones , and the caused disappointment , frustration , even anger .
So as we face today 's challenges , we have to bring all those lessons to bear .
Here 's the bottom line , as I see it : When we make direct strategic investments in communities that have been left behind , and when we guarantee justice and dignity to every American , then we really can make progress .
Lasting progress . Progress that will catapult us into the future .
We can reduce poverty . We can build ladders of opportunity .
So I 'm proposing a comprehensive new commitment to equity and opportunity for African American communities .
That means a real plan to create jobs . If I 'm elected president , we will direct hundreds of billions of dollars in new investments to places like Harlem and rural South Carolina including $20 billion aimed specifically at creating jobs for young people .
The unemployment rate among young African Americans is twice as high as for young white people .
Now , we need to get young people working , developing their skills , unlocking the full extent of the contributions they can make to themselves , their families , and our country .
We need to make sure we 're not only creating good jobs , but connecting black communities to where the good jobs are .
So we 've got to be strategic about our investments in transit and infrastructure .
And we need a real plan , including expanding access to capital to support black entrepreneurs especially black women , who represent the fastest-growing segment of women-owned businesses in America .
And while we 're at it , let 's finally ensure equal pay for equal work for women .
That would benefit women of color most of all , and would lift up an awful lot of families .
And let 's go even further . Let 's follow Governor Cuomo 's lead and raise the minimum wage to help people get out of poverty .
Now we need to support African American homeownership , which has always been one of the surest ways for black families to build wealth .
That 's why I have a plan that would , among things , help African American families save for a down payment .
We need to make sure every family also has access to quality pre-school .
And I applaud Mayor De Blasio for what he 's achieved here in New York with his pre-K program .
And please , help us reverse the dangerous slide towards re-segregation in our schools .
Our schools are now more segregated than they were in 1968 .
That is appalling , and we 've got to fix it .
We also have to make sure everyone who wants to go to college can afford to .
And everyone with student debt can have that debt refinanced , and take thousands of dollars off the burden that they are carrying !
Let 's give tax credits to businesses that actually invest in training and in apprenticeship programs to help young people who don't go for a two or four-year degree .
And my plan gives special support to historically black colleges and universities .
The HBCUs have produced some of the finest leaders in our country .
And it 's not just who they graduated in the past , it 's the work they 're still doing today often against great odds .
And then finally , and so importantly , we need end-to-end reform in our criminal justice system .
Not half measures , but a full commitment with real follow-through .
Now , this is something we can talk about for hours .
In fact , I gave my first speech of this campaign in April not far from here , and it was about reforming criminal justice .
Because the inequities that persist in our justice system undermine our shared vision of what America can and should be .
Our legal system is still , all too often , stacked against those who have the least power , who are the most vulnerable .
And we 've seen the toll it takes on families torn apart by excessive incarceration , and children growing up in homes shattered by prison and poverty .
We 've got to get back to that fundamental principle that everyone , in every community , benefits when there is respect for the law and when everyone is respected by the law .
That is the formula for building trust and cooperation , and we need to not only acknowledge but fix the crisis of mass incarceration .
Let 's finally , once and for all , eliminate the remaining disparity in sentencing between crack and powder cocaine .
Let 's rebuild the bonds of trust between law enforcement and communities by creating more opportunities for people to actually interact with one another , to build relationships .
Let 's the end the epidemic of African Americans being killed by police or dying in custody .
Now I think you know because I sure believe there are many police officers out there every day inspiring trust and confidence , putting themselves on the line to save lives .
So let 's learn from those who are doing it right , and apply those lessons across the country .
Let 's make sure the Justice Department has the resources to hold departments like Ferguson's accountable when they do it wrong .
Again and again , something terrible happens and no one is held accountable ; the deeply troubling pattern , and we 've got to break it .
We 've also got to do a much better job of helping people who have paid their debt to society find jobs and support when they get out .
Up to 60 percent of prisoners who re-enter society face long-term unemployment .
That 's a recipe for hopelessness and repeat offending . My jobs plan would make significant investments in re-entry programs for the formerly incarcerated .
In my faith , we believe in second chances . In America , we believe in second chances .
Let 's give those chances to people who need our help the most .
Let 's give them a fair shot which is also why I will
ban the box in the federal government . And I want to thank Attorney General Holder , who has been really in the forefront of making so many of these changes happen .
And I also want to thank another great New Yorker , Attorney General Loretta Lynch , who is continuing the work for equity and justice !
And let 's roll up our sleeves and get to work to dismantle the school-to-prison pipeline .
It 's diverting too many African-American kids into the criminal justice system , instead of giving them the education they deserve .
We 've seen a significant increase in police involvement in school discipline , especially in schools with majority-black students .
We 're seeing an over-reliance on suspensions and expulsions . I 'm sure many of us remember that horrifying video of the girl in South Carolina being thrown out of her desk and dragged across her classroom by a school police officer .
A classroom should be a safe place for our children .
We shouldn't even have to say that , I don't think .
So today I 'm announcing my plan to end the school to prison pipeline .
It includes major investments in school districts that reform their discipline practices .
We want districts to know , if they do the right thing , we 'll have their backs .
And we will dramatically expand support for guidance counselors , school psychologists and social workers so instead of just labeling kids problem students , they can actually help kids with their problems , and keep them in school !
And for schools that refuse to reform and states that refuse to take this issue seriously , I want the Department of Education 's Office of Civil Rights to intervene , because this this is not just an education issue , this is a civil rights issue and we cannot ignore it any longer .
The bottom line is this : We need to be sending our kids to college .
We need a cradle-to-college pipeline , not sending them into court and into prison .
There 's much more to do . If you go to my website , hillaryclinton.com, you can read our full agenda .
Sometimes people make fun of me because I actually tell you what I want to do as president .
I actually give you plans about what I want to do .
I kind of think it 's my duty to help inform voters , so that you can make a good decision !
But I want to mention one more critical area : Protecting that most fundamental of rights the right to vote .
Across our country , Republican governors and legislatures are erecting one barrier after another that make it harder for black people to vote .
It 's a blast from the Jim Crow past , and we need to call it for what it is .
And in the past few days the stakes got even higher .
Justice Scalia 's passing means the court hangs in the balance .
Now the Republicans say they 'll reject anyone President Obama nominates , no matter how qualified .
Some are even saying he doesn't have the right to nominate anyone , as if somehow he 's not the real president .
That 's in keeping with what we 've heard all along , isn't it ?
Many Republicans talk in coded , racial language about takers and losers .
They demonize President Obama and encourage the ugliest impulses of the paranoid fringe .
This kind of hatred and bigotry has no place in our politics or our country .
The president has the right to nominate , under the Constitution , and the Senate has the obligation to process that nomination .
And I hope the Senate will start paying more attention to statesmanship than partisanship .
And I hope that they will understand that we can have our differences , but let 's not go right after fundamental rules of how we govern ourselves .
That 's a bridge way too far , my friends .
Now , I will appoint Supreme Court justices who will see the Constitution as a blueprint for progress , not as an excuse to try to roll back decisions going all the way back to Teddy Roosevelt which is apparently what some of them would prefer to do !
Now I suppose some people will hear what I 'm proposing and think ,
Well , she 's saying this because she 's in an election .
But many of you in this audience know me , and you know that these issues have always been part of my North Star .
In my first semester at law school , a woman named Marian Wright Edelman came to speak on campus at Yale .
She was the first African American woman admitted to the Mississippi bar , a lawyer for the NAACP in Jackson , a friend of Dr. King before he was murdered altogether a remarkable person .
She talked about starting a Head Start program in Mississippi and using her legal education on behalf of poor children who were invisible to the rest of the country .
Something clicked in my brain that day . Until I heard Marian speak , it wasn't clear to me how to channel my faith and commitment to social justice to try to make a real difference in the world .
But she put me on the path of service . I went to work for her at the Children 's Defense Fund .
She sent me to her home state of South Carolina to take on the problem of black teenagers who were being incarcerated along with adults .
And when I look back , everything else I 've done whether it was going undercover to Alabama to expose segregated academies and try to skip them of their tax exemptions , or running a legal clinic at the University of Arkansas , to represent that 's been part of my mission .
Representing poor people through the Legal Services Corporation : It 's about making people 's lives better .
And it taught me that , even if you 're young and you don't have a powerful job , if you work at it and you stick with it , you can make a difference .
You know , to quote Dr. King , the time is always right to do right no matter who you are .
And when I had the great privilege of representing New York , I worked with members of our congressional delegation .
We fought to bring investments and jobs to neighborhoods that needed them , to improve health care , to get cleaner air and water for low-income communities .
One of the highlights was partnering with the organization , One Hundred Black Men , to create the Eagle Academy , which has been so it 's grown to six schools now in New York taking young African American and Latino men .
There was always something to be done , and I had so many partners here in New York .
We championed reforms to probation and drug diversion programs . We promoted specialized drug courts and juvenile programs , coming full circle with the work that I had done for Marion .
So when I decided to run for president , I knew these issues had to be at the heart of my campaign .
That 's where they 've always been , that 's where they will always be .
And I want to add something else : We Democrats have a special obligation :
If we 're serious about our commitment to the poor , to those who need some help , including African Americans , if we continue to ask black people to vote for us , we cannot minimize the realities of the lives they lead or take their concerns for granted .
You know , you can't just show up at election time and say the right things and think that 's enough .
We can't start building relationships a few weeks before a vote .
We have to demonstrate a sustained commitment to building opportunity , creating prosperity , and righting wrongs .
Not just every two or four years , not just when the cameras are on and people are watching , but every single day .
So here 's what I ask of you : Hold me accountable .
Hold every candidate accountable . What we say matters but what we do matters more .
And you deserve leaders who will do whatever it takes to tear down all the barriers holding you back , and then replace them with those ladders of opportunities that every American deserves to have .
I 'm also asking all Americans to join in that effort .
As Cornell Brooks , the new head of the NAACP , said in our meeting this morning : None of this is a they problem .
It 's a we problem , and all of us have to admit that .
And you know what ? It is not an urban problem .
It 's an American problem . Ending systemic racism requires contributions from all of us especially those of us who haven't experienced it ourselves .
White Americans need to do a better job of listening when African Americans talk about the seen and unseen barriers that you face every day .
We need to recognize our privilege and practice humility , rather than assume that our experiences are everyone 's experiences .
All of us need to bring our skills to bare and especially young people coming up today , who have a passion for social justice and are helping to create new ways to solve intractable problems .
And we all need to try as best we can to walk in one another 's shoes .
Imagine what it would be like to sit our son or daughter down and have the talk .
Or if people followed us around stores or locked our car doors whenever we walked past .
That kind of empathy is critical . It 's what makes it possible for people from every background , every race , every religion to come together in this great city , and to come together as one nation .
It 's what makes a country like America endure . You know , I started my remarks by talking about Flint .
I 'm going to keep talking about Flint until the families there get the help they need for as long as it takes .
But there 's another side to the story of this tragedy .
It 's the story of hundreds of union plumbers from across the country travelling to Flint to install water filters for free .
It 's students at universities all over the Midwest raising funds for water deliveries and student athletes showing up in Flint to distribute supplies .
It 's the United Auto Workers and General Motors donating millions .
It 's money pouring in to organizations where people are donating , if you wish , to try and help the kids and the people of Flint .
And I 'm grateful to everyone who has responded to our request sent out to our campaign .
And it 's the story of that kindergartner in Wilton , NH who lost his first tooth just a few days ago .
The tooth fairy left him five dollars . I got a dime , I don't know about you .
And he said to his mother , I want to give it so those little kids can have water .
His mom sat right down and wrote me a letter about it .
To me , that 's the best of America , and it keeps me going .
That sense we are all in this together . We all have vital contributions to make , and that when we come together all of us with a sense of shared purpose and shared humanity , we can solve any problem we face .
And we can heal any divide . We can build a future that is far , far better than our past .
That is my hope for our country , that is my goal for this election , and I promise to keep fighting right alongside all of you , every day , to make the United States a place where all men and all women are treated as equals just as we are , just as we deserve to be .
That is my hope for America . Thank you all very much .
Read more about how Hillary plan to break down barriers for the African American community .
Well thank you , Jaiza that was great ! And let me thank all of the speakers who preceded me , I am so grateful to have such a wonderful lineup of elected officials and advocates who came before you to express themselves and talk about the stakes in this election .
And I look out , and I see people of different ages and different backgrounds , and I thank each and every one of you for coming here because you know what 's at stake in this election .
And I 've been talking about a lot of those during the course of this campaign .
And will continue to do so . But today , I want to talk about the stakes for women and girls .
Because this next election will determine who our next president is as well as the makeup of the Senate and the House .
And I often when I 'm listening to people running for office , try to understand , are they really going to try to do what they say they 're going to do ?
And I 'm a little nervous that the people on the other side are actually going to try to do what they say they 're going to do .
And that would be turning the clock back on the rights of women , of the LGBT community , of people with disabilities , of poor people , of working people of union members it 's a long list of people they are taking aim at .
That 's why I want in the next months , as we go through this election , for people to really understand how it will affect you , and what you care about .
You know , 20 years ago , this month , I was privileged to go to Beijing , China , to represent the United States at an international conference on women .
And there was a lot of controversy about whether I should go or not .
Controversy seems to follow me around in case you haven't noticed .
It 's sort of part of the territory . But there was a debate it was kind of a legitimate debate .
Did we want to send , at that time , the first lady of the United States to China ?
Would that in some way help the Chinese ? They were keeping political prisoners they wouldn't release
it was quite complicated . But luckily I was able to go and I was able to say on behalf of our country that human rights are women 's rights and women 's rights are human rights .
Now one would think that need to be said , right ?
Well we 've made some progress and I 'm very grateful about that
but we still have work to do even in our own country .
We still have too many women working at minimum wage jobs who can't even get themselves and their kids out of poverty .
We still have too many women who don't get equal pay for equal work no matter how hard they work .
We still have too many women trying to balance their family responsibilities with their work responsibilities with hardly any help at all .
We make it really difficult in America to get quality affordable child care .
To take time off and not lose your job . To take time off and get paid when you have a baby or you 're taking care of somebody in the family that is sick or needy .
We know that women in the workforce today is not a luxury for the vast majority of us ; it 's a necessity .
Especially after the terrible impact of the great recession . And yet so many women now are not in the workforce because they can't make it add up .
I had a young woman holding her baby in her arms in Newton , Iowa , just a few days ago saying , I need time off .
I need some time off without losing my job , and I 'm not the only one .
I 've got to get this baby off to a good start .
I think it 's the most important job I 'll ever do .
And I agree with that . Yes , important absolutely .
So that 's why I am running to raise the minimum wage , to end the disgrace of something called the Tift minimum wage , you may not know about this , but this is where if you work in certain jobs like a hair salon or you 're a waitress or maybe a bartender you can be paid only $2.13 an hour because the idea is you 're supposed to make up the rest in tips .
And you know what happens ? That money doesn't get to the people that earned it .
Wages are actually stolen . So we 're going to end that .
We 're going to raise the minimum wage with no exceptions for everybody .
And then we are once and for all going to enforce equal pay for equal work so that every woman gets her fair due .
And I am promoting seven days of paid sick leave and 12 weeks of paid family leave for men and women when you need it !
Now some people say to me , well , how will that work economically ?
Well it works in most of the rest of the advanced economic world , and it works in a far off place known as California .
So I know it can work , we just have to make up our minds if we want it to work .
And I am going to be a strong advocate for strong families because when families are strong America is strong .
And if we don't support families in dealing with the challenges that they face , we can't have the kind of country we all know we want .
I feel so strongly as president , I will and of course must will take care of the big problems that you read about , see on your screens .
Of course , whether its refugees or ISIS or Russian aggression or climate change .
All those big issues we have to address . But I also want to be the president who helps work on those problems that keep you up at night .
What happens when you finally get that job and then you can't find affordable childcare you trust .
What happens when you work really hard to not only support yourself and your family but you want to go back to school and you can't afford it ?
Or you start and it gets too expensive ? And then you wonder wait a minute , wait , where 's my future ?
I met a young woman in Iowa who told me that she has three kids she 's supporting , she went back to community college and she 's working as hard as she knows how .
She wants to improve her job chances . She said you know look , I 'm not asking for anything special .
But why does it have to be so hard ? And the answer is no , it doesn't have to be so hard .
It doesn't have to be so expensive to be able to go to college .
And you have to come out with so much debt ?
No , you don't . We 're going to make college affordable for everybody .
And we 're also going to help you refinance your debt if you already have student debt .
And we 're going to allow you to tie the payments to your income and we 're going to put a date certain that if you fulfill your obligations to pay that lower amount , at some point it ends .
Because you cannot continue to have that burden . So , we have work to do to make it work again .
Make it work for everybody , not just those at the top who it works for quite well .
I know that . But to make it work for everybody .
And particularly to make it work for women . Because , I 'll tell you why .
The principal mission of my campaign and my presidency is to raise incomes .
That terrible Great Recession just knocked everybody down , didn't it .
People really faced tough times . They lost jobs , they lost their homes .
But we 're coming back , thank goodness . We 're standing but we 're not yet running again .
And we have to start figuring out how we 're going to raise incomes for everybody .
I 've met a lot of hardworking men and women over the course of the last months who tell me , look , I 'm not asking for anything special .
I just want to get back to where I was before the Great Recession hit me .
I want to have the security that I know that I can take care of my family .
That I can plan for the future . So I have a specific set of we 're going to make the rich pay their fair share and they 're going to have to contribute to making this country work again for everybody .
To making the middle class mean something again for everybody .
That 's what built America . We 're going to end the loopholes and the deductions .
We 're going to end something called carried interest , which should never have been allowed in the first place .
We 're going to incentivize profit sharing . If you help corporations make a profit , you ought to be able to share in that profit because of your hard work .
I know we can do this , some people say well how will you get it done .
And I realize that is a challenge because we 've got a pretty dysfunction mess in Washington .
But I worked across the aisle as a senator for eight years , I worked with Republicans as secretary of state .
I know there is no substitute for working hard every single day to try to find common ground .
And I will do that . I will meet any time anywhere with anyone to find common ground .
To help raise incomes , to provide better opportunities for all of our people .
But I will also stand my ground . I will stand my ground , I will defend a woman 's right to choose .
And I will defend Planned Parenthood from these political partisan attacks .
I will also defend marriage equality and work with you to end discrimination against the LGBT community .
I will defend voting rights from the concerted attacks that are going on across the country to eliminate the right to vote .
I will do everything I can to overturn Citizens United and its pernicious effects on our political system .
I will work for comprehensive immigration reform so that we lift people up and create even more opportunity for those who are here .
I will work to make sure that once again we have respect between our law enforcement and the communities they police .
And that requires us to make some changes together , and to understand clearly that black lives matter .
So I think the stakes could not be higher in this election .
Because some people want it to be about everything other than what they would do when they were president .
I think it is really matters that people tell you what they will do and how they intend do it , not just in broad strokes but in detail because how are you , the voter , supposed to be able to make up your minds ?
And this is one of the most consequential decisions you will make .
Now look , I happen to believe that our country and our economy does better when we have a Democrat in the White House .
And I think the evidence for that is compelling . I think you can go way back in our history and see the effects but I 'll just limit myself to the last 35 years .
We 've had five presidents , three Republicans and two Democrats and I have been very privileged to know both the Democrats .
And , I can tell you when my husband ran for president , and Ohio was so good to him , it was about putting people first , right ?
And we needed to put people first because we had to change what was going on in the country , particularly the economy .
It wasn't working for everybody and we had an exploding deficit and we had quadrupled in just 12 years , the debt of our country , something that young people would have to bear .
So after the election Bill said , Oh my gosh .
It is so much worse than they told us .
Because sometimes you don't get all the information inside until you are there .
So he got to work . And it wasn't easy .
It never is easy . But after eight years , we had the longest peacetime expansion in history .
We had 23 million new jobs and most importantly everybody 's income went up .
Not just the top , the middle , the bottom , everybody 's income went up .
And , we ended up with a balanced budget and a surplus .
And , I was pretty excited about that because I was on my way to the Senate .
And I thought , Oh my gosh , we have our financial destiny in our hands .
We now can do what we must do to put our country on the solidest foundation for the future , for the next generation and the generations after that .
We can make sure Social Security is solvent for as far as the I can see .
We can make sure Medicare is . We can make investments in growing our economy in the kinds of new technologies , innovations that marks America .
I was really excited . I get there first thing : New Republican president wants a huge tax cut .
Remember that ? So I said , Look , I 'm a senator now , I can express myself .
I said we could have a moderate tax cut . You know , I get accused of being kind of moderate , center .
I plead guilty . I think sometimes it is important when you are in the elected arena , you figure out how to bring people together to get something done instead of standing on opposite sides yelling at each other .
So I said , okay , let 's have a moderate tax cut .
I voted for one . No we had a big one passed .
OK , it passed . Fast-forward a few months , I am the senator from New York .
We get attacked on 9/11 and it 's going to cost billions of dollars to secure our country , to rebuild New York , to rebuild the pentagon .
A lot of you were really young then . It was a terrifying moment in American history .
And then we got into two wars and for the first time in American history , our president did not pay for either of those wars .
That was all borrowed money . And then they took their eyes off the financial markets and the mortgage markets and you know what happened .
So in 2008 , after President Obama was elected for the first time . He asked me to come see him .
I went to Chicago to see him . I didn't know why .
Turns out he wanted to ask me to be secretary of state .
I didn't know that at the time . But it was just the two of us .
We were sitting there the first thing that came out of his mouth was : They didn't tell us how bad it was .
I said , You know , President-Elect , I 've heard that before .
He said no , he said because both he and I were in the Senate when President Bush put forward the rescue plan .
That was not going to be enough . We could have slid into a great depression .
As bad as things were there could have been much worse .
And American people really worked hard . We were losing 8,000 jobs a month .
President Obama and his team went to work and saved the auto industry , cracked down on Wall Street abuses .
I don't think the president gets the credit he deserves for preventing us from falling even deeper into the ditch .
So now we are out and you know , our economy is recovering but not fast enough and not for everybody yet .
So our job now is to build on what works , not to go back to what didn't go well before , but that 's what you are going to be hearing from the other side .
You are already hearing it . Slash taxes on the wealthy .
Slash taxes on corporations . Let corporations write the rules .
Destroy labor unions , forget about the fact that they helped to create the middle class and still today protect the rights of people .
And of course we hear from candidates on the other side about turning back the clock on women 's rights and there is one particular candidate who just seems to delight in insulting women in every chance he gets .
I have to say , if he emerges , I would love to debate him .
So you know , I go around talking about all these issues talking about economic growth , economic fairness , long-term growth , and why it 's so important that we really help women be economically successful .
It 's good for them , good for their families and good for their economies .
And then Republicans say I am playing the gender card as if they 're not .
And my response is this , if calling for equal pay for equal work is playing the gender card , then deal me in .
I am ready to play . Now , I am so thrilled to be here and honestly , I could go on and on , but we have things to do .
We have a lot of students here I suppose . Are we Ohio State students ?
How do you feel about the Buckeyes ? I love it .
I love it . Well what I want to tell is that as you watch the Republicans is just try to imagine for yourself , what is their vision for America ?
I want you to think of this election the following way : What will America be like if one of them were to win ?
Right ? No but you 've got to because you 've got to understand why this election is so important , especially for young people .
I want you to listen to their next debate . Find out what they say about making college affordable or trying to pay off student debt , or equal pay for equal work , or health care , or how we get drug prices down .
Just listen and see what you think about what they would do as your president .
Because then you have to make a decision and if you make the decision to be a part of my campaign which I hope you will .
Then , I want you to put you to work .
I want you to be part of this campaign to lay out an agenda about what we will do together .
Because of having lived in the White House and because of having served in the administration of President Obama , I know how hard those two presidents worked , but I know you cannot achieve what you want for America unless the American people are part of it .
And I want you not just to be part of my campaign but to be part of what I do as your president .
I have spent a lifetime fighting for the underdogs . Maybe that is because my mother had such a terrible life .
She was the most important woman in my life . And I did not know when she was a little girl that she had been abandoned by her parents and rejected by her grandparents .
She was working as a housemaid by the age of 14 .
I didn't know that . I just knew she was a great mom .
You know , she made me grilled cheese sandwiches with tomato soup .
She loved sports so we would throw the ball around .
She taught me to play tennis . She was a great mom .
And then I learned when I got a little older what she had to go through to be my mother , how resilient and tenacious she had to be .
And then I got to thinking about all the people who have face tough odds in their life .
Every one of us has some story to tell and what my mother taught me is you can be knocked down , but not knocked out .
You have to get right back up . You have to figure out how you are going to do what you need to do .
You know , that 's why when I graduated law school I went to work for the Children 's Defense Fund , advocating , you know , for poor kids , neglected kids , abused kids , kids with disabilities , because I thought man I have had such a blessed life .
I want to give it back in some way . I have been so privileged to do that .
You know , representing poor people , defending their rights , advocating for health care , being knocked down the first time and getting back up and getting children 's health care program coverage for more than 8 million kids .
Just constantly have to be prepared to keep going and that 's kind of the story for America .
This is the greatest country in the history of the world .
Are we perfect ? No we are not perfect , but would you want to live anywhere else ?
No ! And do most people when they think about where they would like to live in the world , still want to live here ?
Yes . So we just have to keep perfecting and improving this exceptional , extraordinary , country of ours .
And this election could be about all of us feeling good about what 's good for America and vowing to fix what 's wrong with America .
And , for me , we have to build this campaign .
We have to spread the word . I want you to join right now .
You can text Join . JOIN to 47246 . You can go to hillaryclinton.com for more information .
I want to encourage some of the young people here like Jaiza to run for office .
You know , start in your local community , make a difference .
Make sure your views are heard , but approach it with what I think our founders expected us to do .
They had big differences . Go back and read early American history .
They didn't always like each other . They didn't get along with each other .
They figured out that they were a part of something bigger than themselves .
And they kept working to find consensus , to make a compromise .
That 's the way we are supposed to work . We have too many people in Washington who think it is there way or the highway , that they have all the answers , that they are right and everybody else is wrong .
That 's not a democracy , folks . That 's not who we should be or are .
So I want to bring back the good old fashioned idea that we are going to sit down , we are going to talk together , we are going to work together .
We are not going to give up until we have some answers to people 's problems because this election is about you not about those of us running for , or holding , office .
So if we wage this campaign together . And we do it with the right attitude , and we win in November 2016 , then I 'm going to want each and every one of you to come to the inauguration so we can get it off to a good start .
And just remember , together we can build an America where everyone has a shot of achieving their dreams and living up to their potential .
We can build an America where we are working with one another , helping one another , having each other 's back , again .
And we can build an America where every father can say to his daughter : You can grow up to be the president of the United States .
Thank you very much ! Hillary 's remarks took on Republicans ' backward priorities , which continue to harm education and fail to address the student debt crisis .
Thank you so much . Thank you so very much to Dr. Harvey-Smith and the entire faculty , administration , student body of River Valley .
I am so honored and delighted to be here , and I wholly endorse the New Hampshire goal of 65 percent by 2025 .
65 by 25 is a very important goal .
Before we get started , I want to call up a longtime friend of mine .
Ray , do you want to do the honors of oh , you already did it ?
Okay , I missed it . I was in the overflow room .
There is just as many people as there are in here in a room just across the hallway , and I want to do a shout out to them , tell them that they 're here with us in spirit , and they can hear and I think even see what we 're doing here today .
So it 's wonderful to be back in Claremont and to have this opportunity to talk with all of you .
I 'm running for president to renew the basic bargain of America : If you work hard and you do your part , you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead .
That 's why I have been emphasizing what it will take for us to start raising incomes again so more Americans can afford a middle-class life .
That is the central challenge we face , because we 've been going backwards instead of forwards when it comes to making sure hardworking Americans get rewarded .
We know who gets rewarded . The people at the top get rewarded .
The deck is really stacked in their favor . If you are a CEO , you 're likely to make 300 , 350 times more than the typical worker .
So we 've got to reshuffle that deck , and we 've got to look at what it is that can be done to raise incomes .
And I 've been outlining my plans as I 've traveled around New Hampshire .
I drove by a Market Basket on my way here .
Some of you know I 'm for profit sharing for everybody , like they do at Market Basket .
And specifically , how we get strong growth , fair growth , and long-term growth .
Well , today I 'm talking about one of the most important aspects of that .
Namely , how do we make college affordable and available for everyone ?
Now , college has been a dream for many Americans for a long time .
Some people question , Well , you know , is post-secondary education really a good investment ?
And the fact is , it still is . It 's a good investment in community college .
It 's a good investment at a four-year college . In fact , somebody with a four-year degree will , on average , make a half-a-million dollars more than somebody who didn't go on after high school .
But equally importantly , we know that the jobs of the future are going to require more education , more skills , more training and that , as we go through our work lives , a lot of people will have to get those skills and education and knowledge refreshed and maybe even retrained .
So I am adamantly in favor of making college affordable and accessible .
How do we do that ? I rolled out yesterday in Exeter what I 'm calling the New College Compact .
How do we actually put together the resources and the incentives to enable young people and maybe not-so-young to be able to go to college ?
Well , I have a plan that I think will accomplish just that .
It asks something from everybody . It asks that states put more resources into higher education in the right way .
In other words , make decisions that are actually in the best interests of students .
And keep the costs down . Don't use tuition raising as the one , two , three plan to try to get more funding for the college or the university .
So I want to make it absolutely clear that you will not have to borrow money for tuition to attend a four-year public college or university under my plan .
And when it comes to some of the other costs besides tuition , like room and board and other fees , I want to make it possible for young people already eligible for Pell grants to use that money to pay their living expenses so they can actually afford to go to college , and for middle class families , we 're going to provide more ways of lowering those costs as well .
It 's also important that the college and universities and the states use the incentive money that my plan will offer to deal with these costs and to try to do what the community colleges here in New Hampshire just did : actually lower tuition .
Why ? Tuition between 2004 and 2014 went up 42% .
In the midst of the Great Recession , higher than anything else was rising ?
You 've got to ask yourself , this just doesn't add up .
So we have to have a system of accountability under this College Compact .
So colleges and universities need to do better . The state governments need to do more of what they used to do in order to keep tuition down .
Families will have to pay something , but it will have to be affordable to them .
And students will be asked to work ten hours a week , at least , so that they do their part .
It 's also really essential in our system of higher education to make community college as available as possible .
I support President Obama 's plan for free community college .
We 've done the numbers on this . We can do this if we are committed to it .
And it 's also important to start dealing with the debt burden .
You know , cost for college should not be a barrier , and debt should not hold you back .
Right now , we have 40 million Americans holding $1.2 trillion in college debt .
I met yes , I see hands ! Everywhere I go , I see hands .
Saw one in the back there yesterday , in Exeter , I met a young man who had one of the worst stories I 've heard ever anywhere in the country in terms of how much debt he 's taken out to pursue his college , because he had to pay both tuition and room and board , and then go to graduate school , because that 's what he wanted to do to make his contribution .
So under my Compact plan , we will refinance everybody 's student debt .
And what that means is because I 've met young people this young man yesterday in Exeter , 12 percent .
Twelve percent ! We 're living in a time when interest rates have hardly budged above 0 .
You can certainly get a mortgage on a house and refinance it .
You can get a car and have a payment you can refinance .
But we don't let our students and their families refinance student debt .
That is just wrong , and we 're going to change that under the College Compact .
Under my plan , you will be able to refinance to the rate that currently exists , so all those students with five to 10 to 12 percent , they 're going to be able to drop it to 3.5 , 3.8 , 4 percent .
I believe this will save thousands of dollars for many students .
And it will also mean that more money will be freed up for these young people and their families to do other things with it .
And I have met young people across our country who have said the following to me : I can't move out of my parent 's home .
Sound familiar ? Met a young girl in Exeter yesterday .
She has a great job in Massachusetts , but in order to pay her student loans , she has to commute back and forth , because she can't afford to live in or near Boston , where her job is .
Number two , I can't start a small business , like I want to .
I 've got this great idea . My buddies and I want to start this small business .
But we 're all burdened down by student debt , and banks won't lend us any money because we have to pay our student debts .
Who knows , maybe the next Steve Jobs is out there trying to figure out how to start a business .
And the worst , We can't get married . We can't get married because we both have student debts and we 're both having to live with our respective parents .
Now , that is sad . I really feel bad about that one .
You know , we also want to recognize that if you do national service under the G.I. Bill in the military , under national service in AmeriCorps , or community service , you should be able to get a benefit that helps you pay your college expenses .
I want to fix some of the glitches in the G.I. program .
We 've had a lot of young men and women who 've served our country go on to education , but some have been taken advantage of by the for-profit college that have really just taken the G.I. money and not produced the results .
I will crack down on these for-profit colleges that are engaging in fraud and abuse of our veterans and look for ways to hold them accountable for everybody else .
Now , I do believe we have an opportunity to cut the costs of education through quality online learning .
And I want to support that and I want to make it possible for your federal assistance for education to be used for quality online learning .
But we 're going to have to be careful to separate the fraudsters from the people who are providing a good service .
But that 's one of the areas where I think there 's a great deal of opportunity to pursue , and I 'm excited about that .
How many of you have ever taken an online course about anything ?
Look at yeah , look at all the hands !
And I want to make sure that they are accredited , quality online courses that you can get credit toward a degree or a certification that gives you the credential you need to get the job that we hope is waiting for you .
So I 'm excited about what we can do together to help hardworking families and ambitious , hardworking young people get the education and the skills they need .
Now , I have to draw a contrast with the candidates on the other side of the aisle .
If you I bet some of you might have sat through four hours and seventeen candidates of debate the other night .
Really , I admire you greatly for that . It 's a part of being in New Hampshire , though , the first in the primary the first in the nation primary .
So I know you 've got an obligation . But if you go and look at those tapes , if you haven't seen it , there was not one word from one of those candidates about making college affordable or dealing with debt .
Now , I don't know who they 're talking to out on the campaign trail well , I kind of have an idea but I 'll tell you who I 'm talking to and listening to .
I 'm talking to a lot of young people and their families who raise their hands at events like this , or come over and talk to me after it 's over and say , I 've got this horrible debt or
I had to drop out of college . My mom got sick .
I couldn't continue . What am I going to do ?
I think this is a major challenge , and I want us to address it .
Not one word from the other side . And you take somebody like Governor Walker of Wisconsin , who seems to be delighting in slashing the investment in higher education in his state ; in making it more difficult for students to get scholarships or to pay off their debt ; eliminating the opportunities for young people who are doctors or dentists to actually work in underserved areas in return for having their debt relieved ; ending scholarships for poor kids ; and most surprisingly to me , rejecting legislation that would have made it tax-deductible for you on your income tax to deduct the amount of your loan payment .
I don't know why he wants to raise taxes on students , but that 's the result .
When you don't look for ways to help people who are not sitting around asking for something , who are actually working hard to get ahead .
That is the basic bargain . So I am looking forward to debating on these issues , because this is what people talk to me about , and this is the kind of president I want to be .
Every single day , trying to figure out how we 're going to help people who are working hard get the benefits of their hard work .
And making college affordable and that 's one of the best things we can do .
Thank you . Thank you all . Thank you very much .
Thank you . I 'm delighted to be here . I want to thank Dionna for introducing me and congratulate her for now being a member of the Des Moines school board .
I want to also thank Eric Van Dorin , the principal of Moulton Elementary School , who is hosting us here , and his family .
I want to recognize Attorney General Tom Miller , thank you so much for being here , Attorney General .
And we 're in the district of Ako Abdul-Samad , state representative
, thank you so much . And we have a number of other elected officials here from Des Moines , from Pope County , and indeed from other places in the state .
I want to start by making some remarks , and then I want to have a chance to take questions , because I hope we will be able to cover one of the issues that I will start with that is so important about the rising cost of drugs , and we 'll be able to get to other questions that you have .
You know , I started this campaign with the firm conviction that we needed once again to renew the basic bargain in America .
We needed to tell people and deliver on the promise that if you work hard and you do your part , you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead .
And for me , I am very grateful that we came out of the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression .
I think the extraordinary burdens that families had to deal with , many of you went through it , combined with the leadership of President Obama , who does not get enough credit for getting us out of that financial ditch we were in , really puts us in a good position for the future , as long as we make the right decision about who should be in the White House come January 2017 .
You know , corporate profits are near record highs , but most paychecks have barely budged .
Costs for everything from child care to college are rising faster than wages .
So the centerpiece of my economic plan is to get incomes rising again , get more money in your paychecks , give the middle class a raise so that you can get back to planning for the future and providing for your children .
So I 'm laying out my approach toward this . And some of you I know , I 've talked with , you 've been following it .
But I also want you to know that I 'm going to pay attention to those problems that also keep you up at night , the kinds of problems you talk about around the kitchen table .
As I 've traveled across Iowa , I 've heard from veterans who aren't getting the health care they need and whose buddies aren't either .
I 've heard from teachers whose students come to school hungry , and don't really have the attention to be able to learn .
I 've heard from grandmothers whose own children are struggling with drug addiction , so they 're taking care of their grandchildren .
A few days ago , in New Hampshire , I spoke with a man whose mother has Alzheimer 's .
He can't afford a full-time caregiver he has to work .
He doesn't know what to do , so I 'll tell you what he does
, he brings his 84-year-old mother to work with him so he can keep an eye on her .
These are the kinds of challenges that people are talking to me about .
So I want to be the president who takes on those big issues in the headlines what are we going to do about Syrian refugees , what are we going to do about climate change , we 've got to get busy combating it , what are we going to do about the kind of challenges we face around the globe but also those quieter problems .
And one area that I 've heard so much about is what we will do to make sure that the Affordable Care Act works for everybody .
You may remember that when I was first lady , I fought for health care reform .
I believed then what I believe now , that every American deserves quality , affordable health care .
It can mean the difference between a family being financially secure or going bankrupt .
It can also literally be the difference between life and death .
And , you know , health care is a huge part of our economy .
So we want to make sure that it 's helping us grow , not holding us back .
The health care battles of the ' 90s were pretty brutal .
At their time , the insurance companies and their allies in Congress blocked us from making the kind of comprehensive reform America needed .
But we kept at it . I worked with leaders on both sides of the aisle to create the Children 's Health Insurance Program that now covers 8 million children across the country , who get health care they need and deserve .
And I was thrilled to be a member of President Obama 's administration when he signed the Affordable Care Act into law .
And I am convinced that we are seeing the results .
For the first time in 50 years , the rate of uninsured Americans has fallen below 10 percent .
As of today , we know nearly 18 million people have gotten health insurance through the Affordable Care Act .
And despite what you hear from the other side of the aisle , it has not bankrupted America .
In fact , it is saving us money , overall health care costs are going down .
But , you know , despite all the evidence , every single republican candidate for president has vowed that , if elected , they 'd get rid of the Affordable Care Act .
And Republicans in Congress have already tried to do that , they have voted 54 times to repeal the Affordable Care Act .
I love it , because it reminds me of that old quote , you know , the definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting a different result .
Well , apparently they 're going to keep voting to repeal it .
They 're living in what I like to call an evidence-free zone .
It doesn't matter what the facts are , they are partisan ideologues and they 're going to keep trying to tear it up and force us back into a debate about health care .
Well , politics can be , unfortunately , a pretty cynical business , but this really goes further than I can tolerate .
I don't know what they would say to all the people who have benefited from the Affordable Care Act .
It 's given millions of families peace of mind , it protects millions of people with pre-existing conditions , it says women cannot be charged more for health care just because we are women , and it lets young people stay on your parents ' plans until the age of 26 , so that you can get the health care you need .
And I particularly love that it 's given access to so many Americans access to lifesaving preventive care like mammograms , vaccinations , and blood pressure screenings .
So , the Republicans are just dead set on repealing it .
And besides , they never will tell you what they would do .
So I believe we can basically discount what they say about the Affordable Care Act or about health care .
They 've even said they want phase out Medicare , imagine that .
Well , I can tell you I will never let anyone phase out Medicare , and I will defend the Affordable Care Act .
But as president I want to go further . I want to strengthen the Affordable Care Act , because the truth is , it couldn't and it didn't solve all of our problems .
Yes , the uninsured rate is the lowest in decades , but the cost of prescription drugs went up by over 12 percent last year .
Now , your income I bet didn't go up by over 12 percent .
Meanwhile , other out-of-pocket costs are growing , too . And the insurance companies just keep raising premiums .
So while the overall growth in health care spending has slowed , and that 's good news for our economy , for a lot of families it doesn't feel like health care costs are coming under control , because their own out-of-pocket costs keep climbing and their wages aren't keeping up .
And that puts a lot of pressure on the families that are talking to me , and it 's not like you can stop buying the medicine your child needs or skip an appointment when you 're really sick because you can't afford the co-pay .
You find the money , even if it means taking on more credit card debt , or being late with other bills .
And those aren't real solutions , so I think we can do better .
I want us to take a really hard look about the pieces of the Affordable Care Act that need improvement .
I have a plan to help families by bringing down the out-of-pocket health care costs that I will be rolling out in the next few days .
Now , though , I want to talk with you about how we can rein in the cost of prescription drugs .
Let me start by saying we live in a time of extraordinary breakthroughs in the fight against disease , from rheumatoid arthritis to multiple sclerosis to cancer .
New drugs are making it possible for people to lead healthy , pain-free lives .
And our pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries deserve credit for that .
They are helping save lives and ensure that America remains the world 's innovation superpower .
And I saw that firsthand as secretary of state , I saw what our medicines meant for people living with diseases like HIV/AIDS . Helping people to stay alive and become healthy is one of the ways America can show who we are , what we stand for , what our values are .
But at the same time , we need to protect hard-working Americans here at home from excessive costs .
Because too often , these drugs cost a fortune . Now , sometimes , there is a good reason for that , scientific breakthroughs are often the result of major investments , both by pharmaceutical companies and by your federal government .
So it may make sense for a short period of time to have to charge a lot of money for a drug .
But when a drug has no competition , when there aren't any other treatments that can do what it does , pharmaceutical companies can charge astronomical fees , far beyond anything that it would take to recoup their investment , and far beyond what they charge consumers anywhere else in the world outside of America .
It has gotten to the point where people are being asked to pay not just hundreds , but thousands of dollars for a single pill .
And I can tell you that is not the way the market is supposed to work , that is bad actors making a fortune off of people 's misfortune .
Some of you may have read about an egregious example of this that was in the news yesterday .
A drug that 's been around for decades it wasn't just invented with new research and new dollars backing that up , it 's been around for decades that went from costing $13.50 a pill to $750 a pill literally overnight .
That 's price gouging , pure and simple . And pharmaceutical companies that acquire an existing , affordable drug that people rely on it , and then turn around and charge a fortune for it just bet on the fact that desperate people will find some way to pay for it .
At the same time this is happening , top pharmaceutical companies are receiving billions of dollars in tax relief every single year , and earning billions of dollar in profits every year .
And many of them spend more money on marketing and advertising than they do on research .
You 've seen the millions of ads on TV , right ?
They often show people being really happy and running through fields of wildflowers , and if you take this drug your life will be so much better .
Meanwhile , they 're telling you it has this bad effect , and that bad effect , and be careful about this , and don't take it with that , but the visual image is so attractive .
And it 's something that has bothered me for a long time .
Now , I know that whenever anyone starts talking , as I have , about reforming prescription drugs and their prices , some people worry that my proposals will threaten innovation .
But I have designed a plan that will do exactly the opposite , I want to both protect consumers and promote innovation , while putting an end to profiteering .
We can achieve a win-win for families , businesses , and America .
There are leaders in the pharmaceutical and biotech industries who share my concerns about high prices , they know we need to make some changes .
They just want to make sure it 's done right , and so do I .
So under my plan , drug companies who want to keep getting federal support will have to redirect more of their profits into meaningful investments in research and development .
That 'll mean more breakthroughs , more good drugs not fewer .
The way I see it , if we , the American taxpayers , support your company , you should be focused on delivering results that benefit us , not just your shareholders and your executives .
And under my plan , I will make sure that when new drugs are introduced , doctors , businesses , and consumers can get clear answers about exactly how these new drugs will improve upon existing treatments .
I fought for this kind of transparency in the Senate , because here 's the truth : Too often , so-called new drugs are really old drugs that have just been tweaked a little bit .
But then they 're marketed as breakthrough drugs , and they 're sold for high prices .
Drug companies should have to explain why their new drugs are different and better than treatments on the market , because I don't want any of us paying for some fancy new pill that is no better than what 's already available .
I also want to tackle the direc t-t o-consumer advertising .
I 'm guessing that a lot of you might be surprised , even shocked , to learn your taxpayer dollars are actually helping pay for those ads .
Other countries ban these ads because they are so often misleading , but at the very least , we shouldn't be encouraging them with corporate write-offs where you can deduct the cost of marketing .
Under my plan , we will instead use that taxpayer money to fund innovation .
I 'd rather see more treatment , more cures , and way fewer ads , and I think a lot of us consumers feel the same way .
I would also like to make sure any ads the drug industry does run are approved by the FDA , so we will know they are accurate and understandable to those consumers who are watching or reading them .
Then there 's Medicare . You know , the more than 40 million Americans enrolled in Medicare represent a huge market for the drug companies .
Therefore , I believe Medicare should be able to negotiate for lower prices for its members .
This would be like what the VA now does , it 's a basic feature of a free market .
But you know it 's actually against the law now for Medicare to negotiate for lower prices , and that makes no sense .
I have been fighting to change this law for years , and as president , I will get it done .
I will require drug companies to provide higher rebates for prescription drugs to low-income Medicare patients , just like they have to do for Medicaid patients .
That would save more than $100 billion in Medicare costs every year .
And you know how the Republicans are always talking about how social security is running out of money , and Medicare is running out of money ?
Well , they way exaggerate it , don't get all nervous about it .
They love to make it sound like it 's going to happen tomorrow , with sort of ghostly music .
Well , we do have to make sure the Medicare trust fund is solvent .
This would add to that . It would be a win-win .
Because what I see is if you get prescriptions or medicines that really help you , it doesn't do you any good if you can't afford to fill them .
So that 's why also under my plan I will cap out-of-pocket drug costs for working families .
You won't have to pay more than $250 a month for covered medications , and we know this can work , because several states have already done it .
I want to do this nationally so that we can keep the costs down particularly for people who have a chronic illness .
Also under my plan , you will be able to import cheaper drugs from other countries legally .
If the medicine you need costs less in Canada , you should be able to buy it from Canada , or any country that meets our safety standards .
You know , when I was privileged to represent New York , you know , look at the map , upstate New York , borders Canada , every week there would be buses of American seniors going over to Canada to buy drugs that were American manufactured , drugs that were invented by American companies , for a much cheaper price over the border .
That makes no sense at all , folks , and when I 'm your president , you will be able to do just that .
Now , I don't want you to have to drive to Canada , so you can order them online and get what you deserve to get .
I will also be sure we have more generics on the market .
That will increase competition and give doctors and patients more choices , and save you money .
Why don't we have more generics on the market ? Well , one reason is that the FDA 's Office of Generic Drugs has a huge backlog .
Well , I 'm going to give them the funding and the personnel to clear that backlog , and approve dozens of generic versions of expensive drugs .
That 's easy to do , we can get it done .
I will save you money , it will help you with your medical issues .
Now , we 've also got to deal with other out-of-pocket costs like deductibles , co-pays , and co-insurance .
According to a report by the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation that came out just today , four out of five workers face an annual deductible , and the average deductible has risen nearly 50 percent since 2009 , and it is now on average over a thousand dollars .
As a result , millions of Americans are having trouble paying their medical bills .
Some of you may be in that category or know somebody who is .
So even though we are successful as a nation in reining in costs , I want you to also have the benefit of that .
Why is it not happening as much as it should ?
Because insurance companies have been keeping the savings for themselves , and shifting more costs onto families .
My plan will address that , I think the insurance companies need to be put on notice that they have to help people afford the medical care they need , not make it increasingly expensive and difficult to access .
So I 'm excited because I think this would really give so many families a real shot at being able to afford the health care that you need .
And with my plan we 're going to add on to the good work that was done by the Affordable Care Act and it 's really important that we work together on this .
We can't let the Republicans tear the progress away , if we 're serious about raising people 's incomes , we have to bring down out-of-pocket costs .
I 'm sure in this election you will see all kinds of ads about the out-of-pocket costs for the Affordable Care Act , and the Republican solution will be get rid of the Affordable Care Act .
That would be a mistake . What we 're going to do is build on and improve the Affordable Care Act .
I 'm just going to keep doing what I 've been doing for years , which is to fight for affordable , quality health care for Americans .
Thank you all very much . Good morning . Good morning .
Wow . This is a great way to start my day .
And I 'm delighted to be here with you . I want to thank Marc for not only the introduction , but all of his work over the years .
I have been a fan of Marc 's since he was mayor of New Orleans .
He did great work there and he 's doing great work at the National Urban League .
So thank you , Marc . And we 're all thinking , as I hope we do every year , about New Orleans as we near the 10th anniversary of Katrina .
Something like that should never be allowed to happen in the United States of America again .
So we have to keep learning the lessons and re-pledging our commitment .
I want to thank everyone for welcoming me here today .
I want to give a shout-out to your national chairman of the board Michael Neidorff ; also , backstage I saw a longtime friend of mine , Congressman Alcee Hastings ; and Alexis Herman , who served in my husband 's administration ; and Tony West , who served in President Obama 's administration .
There 's a veritable hall of fame here for this event .
And I can never come to a National Urban League gathering without mentioning my lifelong friend Vernon Jordan .
He may not be here today , but he 's with us in spirit because of his deep love and commitment to this organization .
It 's also close to my heart . Over the years , I 've gotten the chance to work with you , learn from you .
I 've pored over your State of Black America reports , I 've spoken at your conferences , but most importantly , I 've seen how you change people 's lives .
The theme of this conference Saving Our Cities : Education , Jobs and Justice speaks to the important work that you 've been doing for decades .
I know that you help black entrepreneurs get start-up capital .
I know you help people find jobs . I know you give families financial counseling so they can achieve their dreams of buying a home or sending their kids to college .
And you make sure parents have the tools to take care of their kids ' health .
That 's the kind of day-to-day commitment that makes such a difference .
As you help prepare young people for college and work in a world that can sometimes make them feel that they 're not very important , you make sure they know just how precious and powerful they really are .
This vital work has been my work too . My first job out of law school wasn't at some big law firm ; it was with the Children 's Defense Fund , started by Marian Wright Edelman .
That first summer after I graduated , I went door to door for kids shut out of school and denied the education they deserve .
I also began a lifelong concern by working with the CDF to try to figure out what we did with kids caught up in the juvenile and adult prison systems .
As first lady , I helped create the Children 's Health Insurance Program .
You were an ally in doing that . As Senator , I championed small businesses owned by women and people of color , because that 's where a lot of the jobs in America come from .
I fought to raise the minimum wage because no one who works hard in America should have to raise their kids in poverty .
These issues your issues are deeply personal to me .
So I 'm here early on this morning , first and foremost , to say thank you .
But I 'm also here to talk about the future because the work you have been doing is more important than ever , and I 'm going to keep doing that work right alongside you .
Now , I would love nothing more than to stay and have a conversation for hours , going into depth about every single issue that we are worried about , but you have a full slate of speakers that will follow me .
So let me make three points about the work we need to do together .
First : The opportunity gap that America is facing is not just about economic inequality .
It is about racial inequality . Now , that may seem obvious to you , but it bears underscoring because some of the evidence that backs it up would come as a shock to many Americans .
Like how African Americans are nearly three times as likely as whites to be denied a mortgage .
Or how , in 2013 , the median wealth for white families was more than $ 134,000 but for African American families , it was just $ 11,000 .
A lot of people don't realize that our schools are more segregated today than they were in 1968 .
Or even that African Americans are sentenced to longer prison terms than white people for the same crimes . Or that political operatives are trying every trick in the book to prevent African Americans from voting .
And listen to this one , because as somebody who started with the Children 's Defense Fund and who now is the proud and delighted grandmother of a 10-month-old granddaughter : African American children are 500 percent 500 percent more likely to die from asthma than white kids .
Now , I studied and advocated and introduced legislation to close health disparities .
I knew how severe they were , but 500 percent ?
So all of this points to an unavoidable conclusion : race .
Race still plays a significant role in determining who gets ahead in America and who gets left behind .
And yes , while that 's partly a legacy of discrimination that stretches back to the start of our nation , it is also because of discrimination that is still ongoing .
I 'm not saying anything you don't already know . You understand this better than I do better than anyone .
But I want to say it anyway . Because I 'm planning to be president , and anyone who seeks that office has a responsibility to say it .
And more than that , to grapple with the systemic inequities that so many Americans face .
Anyone who asks for your vote should try their hardest to see things as they actually are , not just as we want them to be .
So I want you to know I see it and I hear you .
And the racial disparity you work hard every day to overcome goes against everything I believe in , and everything I want to help America achieve .
The second point is this : This is not just about statistics , as damning as they can be .
This is about Americans doing some soul-searching and holding ourselves to account .
This is about all of us looking into our hearts , examining our assumptions and fears , and asking ourselves : What more can I do in my life to counter hate and injustice ?
How can I make our country a better , fairer place ?
Let me be clear : I think all of us need to do that kind of introspection .
But those of us who have not experienced systemic racial inequities we have an extra obligation .
We need to do a better job of listening when people talk about the seen and unseen barriers they face every day .
We need to practice humility , rather than assume that our experiences are everyone 's experiences .
And yes , we need to try , as best we can , to walk in one another 's shoes to imagine what it would be like to sit our son down and have the talk , or if people followed us around stores , or locked their car doors when we walked past .
That that 's what makes it possible for people from every background , every race , every religion , to come together as one nation .
That 's the kind of generosity of spirit that makes a country like America endure .
And given what we 've seen and experienced over the last two years , this is an urgent call for people to search their own hearts and minds .
Here 's my third point : We 've arrived at a moment when all these challenges are in sharp relief , and we have to seize it .
Too many times now , Americans have come together , in shock and horror , to process a violent , senseless tragedy .
Like Trayvon Martin , shot to death not in some empty , desolate street somewhere , but in a gated community .
He wasn't a stranger , he had family there . Or Sandra Bland , a college-educated young woman who knew her rights , who didn't do anything wrong , but still ended up dying in a jail cell .
Together , we 've mourned Tamir Rice and Eric Garner , Walter Scott and Freddie Gray , and most recently , Sam DuBose .
These names are emblazoned on our hearts . We 've seen their faces , we 've heard their grieving families .
We 've seen a massacre in Charleston , and black churches set on fire today , in 2015 .
But thankfully , tragedy is not all we have seen .
Yes , the Confederate battle flag came down finally in South Carolina .
The families of the Charleston victims reached out with extraordinary grace to the man who killed their loved ones .
And President Obama delivered a eulogy that sounded as though it had come straight from angels , ending with Amazing Grace .
Young people have taken to the streets , dignified and determined , urging us to affirm the basic fact that black lives matter .
And because of people across this country sharing their stories with courage and strength , a growing number of Americans are realizing what many of you have been saying for a long time we can't go on like this ; we are better than this ; things must change .
Now , it 's up to us to build on that momentum , and we all have to do our part but those of us who strive to lead have a special responsibility .
I 'm very pleased that many presidential candidates will be here today to address you .
It is a signal that the work you 've been doing laboring in the vineyards for decades is getting the political attention it deserves .
But the real test of a candidate 's commitment is not whether we come to speak at your national conference , as important as that is .
It 's whether we 're still around after the cameras are gone and the votes are counted .
It 's whether our positions live up to our rhetoric .
And too often we see a mismatch between what some candidates say in venues like this , and what they actually do when they 're elected .
I don't think you can credibly say that everyone has a right to rise and then say you 're for phasing out Medicare or for repealing Obamacare .
People can't rise if they can't afford health care . They can't rise if the minimum wage is too low to live on .
They can't rise if their governor makes it harder for them to get a college education .
And you cannot seriously talk about the right to rise and support laws that deny the right to vote .
So yes , what people say matters , but what they do matters more .
Americans , especially today , deserve leaders who will face inequity , race and justice issues in all their complexity head on who won't just concede that there are barriers holding people back , who will do instead what it takes to tear those barriers down , once and for all .
I will never stop working on issues of equality and opportunity , race and justice .
That is a promise . I 've done it my entire adult life .
I will always be in your corner . Because issues like these they are why I 'm running for president .
They are why I got involved in public service in the first place to tear down the barriers that hold people back from developing their talents and achieving their dreams .
I 'm asking you to hold me accountable , to hold all of us accountable .
Because the work that you 're doing must lead to action .
And you deserve leaders who not only get that , but who will work hard every day to make our country a better place to make it live up to its potential and to provide the opportunities for every single child in this country to live up to his or her God-given potential .
Yes , I do have this 10-month-old grandchild now , and I 've got to tell you those of you who already have reached this incredible , transformational point in your lives understand this there is nothing like it to focus you on the present .
When Bill and I are with Charlotte , doing our best to babysit the phones are off , the TV is off ; we 're just focused on this miracle of life .
And we 're the kind of grandparents , I 'll confess , that when she learns to clap her hands we give her a standing ovation .
But you see , it 's not just about our granddaughter , is it ?
We , of course , will do everything we can to make sure she has all the opportunities she should as a citizen of this country , as a child of God , as a person who has the right to go as far as her hard work and talent will take her .
But that 's not enough . I don't want that just for my granddaughter .
I 'm the granddaughter of a factory worker who worked from the time he was a teenager to the time he retired in the Scranton lace mills .
I know how blessed I 've been , and opportunities that I had that others with just as much talent did not .
So let us tear down the barriers so no matter whose child you are or grandchild you are , you too will have the same chance .
I 'm proud to be your ally . I 'm committed to being your partner .
I will keep fighting right alongside you , today and always , to make the United States of America a country where all men and women , all boys and girls , are treated as they deserve to be as equals .
I know we can do this . I know the path ahead is not easy .
But I 'm absolutely convinced that we will once again join hands and make a difference for those young people who not only need a path , but need the love and embrace of a grateful nation for the contributions they each will make to a better future for us all .
Thank you and God bless you . JANET WU : Let 's start with that .
The shooting in Oregon . I assume you heard about it just within the last couple of hours or so .
HILLARY CLINTON : Yes , I did . In fact , as I was walking in here I was told that the death toll is up to 15 .
And I have to tell you , Janet , I am just sick of this .
I 'm sick about it , and I feel an absolute urgency for this country to start being sensible about keeping guns away from people who should not have them .
I 'm going to be pushing this issue . Universal background checks , a long enough waiting period so that people can't sneak in under the deadline because the full investigation wasn't completed .
I would like us to be absolutely determined , as I am , to try to do something about this .
JANET WU : But you know that a lot of politicians have tried to come to go up against the NRA , and they 've all failed .
What makes you feel that you could win this battle ?
HILLARY CLINTON : Well , my husband beat them , and he got an assault weapons ban which lasted for 10 years and did have a positive effect .
I think that what we need is a national movement , when gun control issues are put on national , or put on state , or local ballots for referendum , they pass in many instances .
So we 're going to go at this from the top down , namely go back to the Congress , go back to try and put together a sensible , bipartisan position that was supported before in the Senate to get to universal background checks .
But we 're also going to go from the bottom up .
I 'm going to make this a voting issue , because what the NRA does in their single-minded , absolutist theology about the Second Amendment being sacrosanct , when we know that every constitutional right and amendment can be tailored in an appropriate way without breaching the Constitution .
But what they do is intimidate and scare legislators because they make it into a single issue for voting .
I 'm going to try to do everything I can as president to raise up an equally large and vocal group that is going to prove to be a counterbalance , and we 're going to tell legislators , do not be afraid .
Stand up to these people because a majority of the population and a majority of gun owners agree that there should be universal background checks and the NRA has stood in the way .
Well , thank you , and thanks to everyone hosting this first of the Democratic debates .
I 'm Hillary Clinton . I have been proud and privileged to serve as first lady , as a senator from New York , and as secretary of state .
I 'm the granddaughter of a factory worker and the grandmother of a wonderful 1-year-old child .
And every day I think about what we need to do to make sure that opportunity is available , not just for her , but for all of our children .
I have spent a very long time , my entire adult life , looking for ways to even the odds , to help people have a chance to get ahead .
And in particular , to find the ways for each child to live up to his or her God-given potential .
I 've traveled across our country over the last months listening , and learning , and I 've put forward specific plans about how we 're going to create more good-paying jobs by investing in infrastructure and clean energy , by making it possible once again to invest in science and research and taking the opportunity posed by climate change to grow our economy .
At the center of my campaign is how we 're going to raise wages .
Yes , of course , raise the minimum wage , but we have to do so much more including finding ways so that companies share profits with the workers that helped to make them .
And then we have to figure out how we 're going to make the tax system a fairer one .
Right now the wealthy pay too little and the middle class pays too much .
So I have specific recommendations about how we 're going to close those loopholes , make it clear that the wealthy have to pay their fair share and have a series of tax cuts for middle-class families .
And I want to do more to help us balance family and work .
I believe in equal pay for equal work for women , but I also feel it 's about time for paid family leave for American families and joined the rest of the world .
During the course of the evening tonight , I 'll have a chance to lay out all of my plans and the work that I 've done behind them .
But for me this is about bringing our country together again .
And I will do everything I can to heal the divides the divides economically because there 's too much inequality , the racial divides , the continuing discrimination of the LGBT community , so that we will work together and yes , finally , fathers will be able to say to their daughters ,
You too can grow up to be president . Thank you very much , Anderson , and thanks to all the viewers who tuned in tonight .
I think what you did see is that in this debate , we tried to deal with some of the very tough issues facing our country .
That 's in stark contrast to the Republicans who are currently running for president .
What you have to ask yourself is who amongst us has the vision for actually making the changes that are going to improve the lives of the American people .
Who has the tenacity and the ability and the proven track record of getting that done .
Now , I revere my late mother , and she gave me a lot of good advice , but one of the best pieces of advice she gave me was , you know , the issue is not whether or not you get knocked down , it 's whether you get back up .
America 's been knocked down . That Great Recession , 9 million people lost their jobs , 5 million lost their homes , $13 trillion in wealth disappeared , and although we 've made progress , we 're standing but not running the way America needs to .
My mission as president will be to raise incomes for hardworking middle-class families and to make sure we get back to the basic bargain I was raised with .
If you work hard and do your part , you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead .
Please join me in this campaign . Please come and make it clear that America 's best days are still ahead .
Thank you very much . Hillary discussed her long history of fighting to expand voting rights from her work in 1972 to register Latino voters in Texas ' Rio Grande Valley to her advocacy as Senator for legislation to make Election Day a federal holiday , mandate early voting opportunities , and criminalize some forms of voter deception .
In her speech , Hillary also denounced Republican efforts to restrict voting , which have had a disproportionately harmful effect on young and minority voters and seniors .
She specifically criticized actions by Republican governors Scott Walker in Wisconsin , Jeb Bush in Florida , Rick Perry in Texas , and Chris Christie in New Jersey that have reduced or prevented early voting , purged voters , or enacted harsh and restrictive identification requirements .
Wow ! Thank you so very much . I cannot tell you how personally honored I am to be here with all of you , to be at this historic institution .
Let me start by thanking President Rudley and everyone at Texas Southern university .
It 's a great treat to be here , to have heard just briefly from Dr. Rudley and others about the incredible programs and progress and the fact that you graduated more than 1,000 young people into the world not so many days ago .
This institution is the living legacy , the absolute embodiment , of Heman Marion Sweatt and the long struggle for civil rights .
And for me , to be surrounded by so many here in Houston , Texas , and indeed from across our country , who were part of that movement is especially touching .
I am delighted to be here with my friend , Sheila Jackson Lee ; she has been a tireless champion for the people of the 18th District and state and the country .
I have to tell you , though , I thought she would tell you about the most important news coming out of Congress .
And that is she is finally a member of the Grandmother 's Club .
And as a member of now a little over 8 months , it is the best club you will ever be a member of , Sheila .
I have to tell you , I was excited to come here and to talk about an issue that is important to Barbara Jordan and should be important to all of us .
But to do so in front of Dr. Freeman is a little daunting .
I mean , anyone who knows what this man has meant , not only to Barbara Jordan but to so many who have studied here who have been in any way affected by his brilliant teaching , elocution , and delivery , would be a little daunted too .
I noticed that both Dr. Rudley and Dr. Sheila both got off before Dr. Freeman came up .
I also want to say my thoughts and prayers are with all the families in Houston and across Texas affected by the recent terrible flooding .
And I am confident that this community will embrace them .
I remember very well coming here after Katrina with my husband and in fact we decided to invite along a young senator from Illinois by the name of Barack Obama , and along with Sheila and other leaders in the community , we toured the facilities that Houston had provided to those who were fleeing that horrific storm .
And I saw how people had opened their hearts and their homes .
This is a city that knows how to pull together , and I 'm confident you 'll do so again on behalf of those who are suffering from this latest terrible disaster .
And it is also a special moment to be here knowing that Barbara Jordan was succeeded by Mickey Leland , and the 18th District was so well represented for so long .
And I am delighted to be here with Alison and to remember the pioneering work he did on behalf of children and the poor and hungry , so many issues that he was the champion of .
And I want to thank Rosemary McGowan and all the friends and loved ones of Barbara Jordan here today .
This is such a particular honor for me because the award is in memory of one of my true personal heroes a woman who taught me and so many others the meaning of courage and determination and justice .
I first met Barbara Jordan when I was a young attorney and had been given a position working for the House of Representatives ' Judiciary Committee investigating Richard Nixon , and it was such a profound moment in American history , and there wasn't anyone who was a more effective , eloquent inquisitor than Barbara Jordan .
As a 26-year-old fresh out of law school , as some of you are perhaps , now having graduated from the Thurgood Marshall school here at TSU , I was riveted and not a little intimidated , to tell you the truth , by this unstoppable congresswoman from Texas .
I got to talk with her , which was thrilling , I got to hand her papers , which was equally exciting , but mostly I got to watch and listen to her .
At a time of shaken confidence , she stirred the entire nation with her words .
Remember what she said : My faith in the Constitution is whole ; it is complete ; it is total .
It was that passion and moral clarity that took Barbara Jordan from TSU and the halls of Texas legislature all the ways to the halls of Congress .
The first woman and the first African American ever elected to represent Texas in the House of Representatives .
And she defended and continued the civil rights legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and her friend and mentor President Lyndon Johnson and in particular she was a staunch advocate for the Voting Rights Act , which had helped make it possible for her to be elected .
In 1975 , in the face of fierce opposition , Barbara Jordan led the fight to extend the special protections of the Voting Rights Act to many more Americans , including Hispanic Americans , Native Americans , and Asian Americans as well .
And like every woman who has run for national office in this country in the last four decades , I stand here on the shoulders of Barbara Jordan , and so does our entire country .
And boy do we miss her . We miss her courage , we also miss her humor ( she was funny ) , and most of all her irresistible voice .
I remember talking to her and Ann Richards one time .
And between the two of them , forget trying to get a word in at all .
And they were telling me about how they would love to go to the University of Texas women 's basketball games .
Right , and Barbara would be there , by that time in her wheelchair , and Ann would be holding court right next to her .
And Barbara would be yelling directions like she was , you know , the coach .
Why are you doing that ? Jump higher ! That 's not a pass ! , you know , all of those kinds of sideline comments .
And so Ann was telling me this , with Barbara right there , and I finally turned to her and said , Barbara , encourage these young women , don't just criticize them .
And Barbara turned around and said to me ,
When they deserve it , I will . We sure could use her irresistible voice .
I wish we could hear that voice one more time .
Hear her express the outrage we feel about the fact that 40 years after Barbara Jordan fought to extend the Voting Rights Act , its heart has been ripped out .
And I wish we could hear her speak up for the student who has to wait for hours to vote
For the grandmother who 's turned away from the polls because her driver 's license expired
For the father who 's done his time and paid his debt to society but still hasn't gotten his rights back .
Now we know , unfortunately , Barbara isn't here to speak up for them and so many others .
But we are . And we have a responsibility to say clearly and directly what 's really going on in our country because what is happening is a sweeping effort to disempower and disenfranchise people of color , poor people , and young people from one end of our country to the other .
Because since the Supreme Court eviscerated a key provision of the Voting Rights Act in 2013 , many of the states that previously faced special scrutiny because of a history of racial discrimination have proposed and passed new laws that make it harder than ever to vote .
North Carolina passed a bill that went after pretty much anything that makes voting more convenient or more accessible .
Early voting . Same-day registration . The ability of county election officials to even extend voting hours to accommodate long lines .
What possible reason could there be to end pre-registration for 16 and 17 year olds and eliminate voter outreach in high schools ?
We should be doing everything we can to get our young people more engaged in democracy , not less .
In fact I would say it is a cruel irony but no coincidence that millennials , the most diverse , tolerant , and inclusive generation in American history , are now facing so much exclusion .
And we need look no further than right here in Texas .
You all know this far better than I , but if you want to vote in this state , you can use a concealed weapon permit as a valid form of identification but a valid student ID isn't good enough ?
Now , Krystal Watson found out the hard way . She grew up in Louisiana but came to Marshall , Texas , to attend Wiley College .
Krystal takes her responsibilities as a citizen so seriously that not only did she register to vote in Texas , where she was living and would be for a number of years , she even became a deputy registrar to help other people vote as well .
But this past year , when she showed up at her local polling place with a Wiley College ID , she was turned away .
Experts estimate that hundreds of thousands of registered voters in Texas may face similar situations .
And while high-profile state laws like those in Texas and North Carolina get most of the attention , many of the worst offenses against the right to vote actually happen below the radar .
Like when authorities shift poll locations and election dates . Or scrap language assistance for non-English speakers something Barbara Jordan fought so hard for .
Without the pre-clearance provisions of the Voting Rights Act , no one outside the local community is likely to ever hear about these abuses , let alone have a chance to challenge them and end them .
It 's not a surprise for you to hear that studies and everyday experiences confirm that minority voters are more likely than white voters to wait in long lines at the polls .
They are also far more likely to vote in polling places with insufficient numbers of voting machines .
In South Carolina , for example , there 's supposed to be one machine for every 250 voters .
But in minority areas , that rule is just often overlooked .
In Richland Country , nearly 90 percent of the precincts failed to meet the standard required by law in 2012 .
Instead of 250 voters per machine , in one precinct it was more than 430 voters per machine .
Not surprisingly , people trying to cast a ballot there faced massive delays .
Now there are many fair-minded , well-intentioned election officials and state legislators all over this country .
But this kind of disparity that I just mentioned does not happen by accident .
Now some of you may have heard me or my husband say one of our favorite sayings from Arkansas , of course I learned it from him .
You find a turtle on a fence post , it did not get there on its own .
Well , all of these problems with voting did not just happen by accident .
And it is just wrong ; it 's wrong to try to prevent , undermine , and inhibit American 's right to vote .
It 's counter to the values we share . And at a time when so many Americans have lost trust in our political system , it 's the opposite of what we should be doing in this country .
This is the greatest , longest-lasting democracy in the history of the world ; we should be clearing the way for more people to vote , not putting up every roadblock anyone can imagine .
Yet unfortunately today , there are people who offer themselves to be leaders whose actions have undercut this fundamental American principle .
Here in Texas , former Governor Rick Perry signed a law that a federal court said was actually written with the purpose of discriminating against minority voters .
He applauded when the Voting Rights Act was gutted and said the lost protections were outdated and unnecessary .
But Governor Perry is hardly alone in his crusade against voting rights .
In Wisconsin , Governor Scott Walker cut back early voting and signed legislation that would make it harder for college students to vote .
In New Jersey , Governor Christie vetoed legislation to extend early voting .
And in Florida , when Jeb Bush was governor , state authorities conducted a deeply flawed purge of voters before the presidential election in 2000 .
Thankfully , in 2004 a plan to purge even more voters was headed off .
So today , Republicans are systematically and deliberately trying to stop millions of American citizens from voting .
What part of democracy are they afraid of ? I believe every citizen has the right to vote .
And I believe we should do everything we can to make it easier for every citizen to vote .
I call on Republicans at all levels of government with all manner of ambition to stop fear mongering about a phantom epidemic of election fraud and start explaining why they 're so scared of letting citizens have their say .
Yes , this is about democracy . But it 's also about dignity .
About the ability to stand up and say , yes , I am a citizen .
I am an American . My voice counts . And no matter where you come from or what you look like or how much money you have , that means something .
In fact , it means a lot . I learned those lessons right here in Texas , registering voters in South Texas down in the valley in 1972 .
Some of the people I met were , understandably , a little wary of a girl from Chicago who didn't speak a word of Spanish .
But they wanted to vote . They were citizens . They wanted to exercise all the rights and responsibilities that citizenship conveys .
That 's what should matter because when these rights are denied , it doesn't just hold back the aspirations of individual citizens .
It holds back our entire country . That 's why , as a senator , I championed a bill called the Count Every Vote Act .
If it had become law , it would have made Election Day a federal holiday and mandated early voting opportunities .
Deceiving voters , including sending flyers into minority neighborhoods with false voting times and places , would have become a federal crime .
And many Americans with criminal convictions who had paid their debt to society would have finally gotten their voting rights back .
Well , today , with the damage to the Voting Rights Act so severe , the need for action is even more urgent .
First , Congress should move quickly to pass legislation to repair that damage and restore the full protections that American voters need and deserve .
I was in the Senate in 2006 when we voted 98 to zero to reauthorize the Voting Rights Act after an exhaustive review process .
There had been more than 20 hearings in the House and Senate Judiciary Committees .
Testimony from expert witnesses . Investigative reports documenting continuing discrimination in covered jurisdictions .
There were more than 15,000 pages of legislative record . Now that is how the system is supposed to work .
You gather the evidence , you weigh it , and you decide .
And we did , 98 to nothing . We put principle ahead of politics .
That is what Congress needs to do again . Second , we should implement the recommendations of the bipartisan presidential commission to improve voting .
That commission was chaired by President Obama 's campaign lawyer and by Governor Mitt Romney campaign 's lawyer .
And they actually agreed . These are commonsense reforms , including expanding early , absentee , and mail voting .
Providing online voter registration . Establishing the principle that no one should ever have to wait more than 30 minutes to cast their vote .
Third , we should set a standard across our country of at least 20 days of early in-person voting everywhere including opportunities for weekend and evening voting .
If families coming out of church on Sunday before an election are inspired to go vote , they should be free to do just that .
And we know that early in-person voting will reduce those long lines and give more citizens the chance to participate , especially those who have work or family obligations that make it difficult to get to the polls on Election Day .
It 's not just it 's also more secure , more reliable , and more affordable than absentee voting .
So let 's get this done . And I believe we should go even further to strengthen voting rights in America .
So today I am calling for universal , automatic voter registration .
Everyone , every young man or young woman , in every state in the union , should be automatically registered to vote when they turn 18 unless they actively choose to opt out .
But I believe this would have a profound impact on our elections and our democracy .
Between a quarter and a third of all eligible Americans remain unregistered and therefore unable to vote .
And we should modernize our entire approach to registration . The current system is a relic from an earlier age .
It relies on a blizzard of paper records , and it 's full of errors .
We can do better . We can make sure that registration rolls are secure , up-to-date , and complete .
When you move , your registration should move with you .
If you are an eligible voter and want to be registered , you should be a registered voter period .
Now , Oregon is already leading the way modernizing its system , and the rest of the country should follow .
The technology is there . States have a lot of the data already .
It 's just a matter of syncing and streamlining . Now , all of these reforms , from expanded early voting to modernized registration , are commonsense ways to strengthen our democracy .
But I 'll be candid here , none of them will come easily .
It 's going to take leadership at many levels . Now more than ever , we need our citizens to actually get out and vote for people who want to hear what is on their minds .
We need more activists working to expose abuses , educate Americans about their rights , and hold authorities accountable for protecting them .
Some of the worst provisions in recent laws have been blocked or delayed by tireless advocates raising the alarm and filing legal challenges .
But they can't do it alone . We need more grassroots mobilization efforts like the Moral Monday movement in North Carolina to build momentum for reform .
We need more justices on the Supreme Court who will protect every citizen 's right to vote , I mean , the principle underlying our Constitution , which we had to fight for a long time to make apply to everybody one person , one vote and we need a Supreme Court that cares more about protecting the right to vote of a person than the right to buy an election of a corporation .
But of course , you know what we really need ?
We need more elected leaders from Houston to Austin to Washington who will follow in the footsteps of Barbara Jordan and fight for the rights and opportunities of everyday Americans , not just those at the top of the ladder .
And we need to remember that progress is built on common ground , not scorched earth .
You know , when I traveled around the world as secretary of state , one of the most frequent questions I was asked was : How could you and President Obama work together after you fought so hard in that campaign ?
People were genuinely amazed , which I suppose is understandable , considering that in many places , when you lose an election or you oppose someone who wins , you could get imprisoned or exiled even killed not hired as secretary of state .
And it 's true , I was surprised when the president asked me to serve .
But he made that offer , and I accepted it , because we both love our country .
So , my friends , here at this historic institution , let us remember that America was built by people who knew that our common interest was more important than our self-interest .
They were fearless in pursuit of a stronger , freer , and fairer nation .
As Barbara Jordan famously reminded us , when the Constitution was first written , it left most of us here out .
But generations of Americans fought and marched and organized and prayed to expand the circle of freedom and opportunity .
They never gave up and never backed down . And nearly a century ago on this very day , after years of struggle , Congress finally passed the 19th Amendment to give women the right to vote in the United States .
So that is , that is the story of progress , courageous men and women , expanding rights , not restricting them .
And today we refuse , we refuse to allow our country or this generation of leaders to slow or reverse America 's long march toward a more perfect union .
We owe it to our children and grandchildren to fight just as hard as those who came before us did .
To march just as far . To organize just as well .
To speak out just as loudly . And to vote every chance we get for the kind of future we want .
That 's what Barbara Jordan would do . That 's what we should do in honor of her .
Thank you , and may God bless you . Thank you !
Oh , thank you all ! Thank you so very , very much .
It is wonderful to be here with all of you .
To be in New York with my family , with so many friends , including many New Yorkers who gave me the honor of serving them in the Senate for eight years .
To be right across the water from the headquarters of the United Nations , where I represented our country many times .
To be here in this beautiful park dedicated to Franklin Roosevelt 's enduring vision of America , the nation we want to be .
And in a place with absolutely no ceilings . You know , President Roosevelt 's Four Freedoms are a testament to our nation 's unmatched aspirations and a reminder of our unfinished work at home and abroad .
His legacy lifted up a nation and inspired presidents who followed .
One is the man I served as secretary of state , Barack Obama , and another is my husband , Bill Clinton .
Two Democrats guided by the oh , that will make him so happy .
They were and are two Democrats guided by the fundamental American belief that real and lasting prosperity must be built by all and shared by all .
President Roosevelt called on every American to do his or her part , and every American answered .
He said there 's no mystery about what it takes to build a strong and prosperous America :
Equality of opportunity Jobs for those who can work Security for those who need it The ending of special privilege for the few the preservation of civil liberties for all a wider and constantly rising standard of living .
That still sounds good to me . It 's America 's basic bargain .
If you do your part , you ought to be able to get ahead .
And when everybody does their part , America gets ahead too .
That bargain inspired generations of families , including my own .
It 's what kept my grandfather going to work in the same Scranton lace mill every day for 50 years .
It 's what led my father to believe that if he scrimped and saved , his small business printing drapery fabric in Chicago could provide us with a middle-class life .
And it did . When President Clinton honored the bargain , we had the longest peacetime expansion in history , a balanced budget , ( cheers , applause ) and the first time in decades , we all grew together , with the bottom 20 percent of workers increasing their incomes by the same percentage as the top five percent .
When President Obama honored the bargain , we pulled back from the brink of depression , saved the auto industry , provided health care to 16 million working people , and replaced the jobs we lost faster than after a financial crash .
But , it 's not 1941 , or 1993 , or even 2009 .
We face new challenges in our economy and our democracy .
We 're still working our way back from a crisis that happened because time-tested values were replaced by false promises .
Instead of an economy built by every American , for every American , we were told that if we let those at the top pay lower taxes and bend the rules , their success would trickle down to everyone else .
What happened ? Well , instead of a balanced budget with surpluses that could have eventually paid off our national debt , the Republicans twice cut taxes for the wealthiest , borrowed money from other countries to pay for two wars , and family incomes dropped .
You know where we ended up . Except it wasn't the end .
As we have since our founding , Americans made a new beginning .
You worked extra shifts , took second jobs , postponed home repairs you figured out how to make it work .
And now people are beginning to think about their future again going to college , starting a business , buying a house , finally being able to put away something for retirement .
So we 're standing again . But , we all know we 're not yet running the way America should .
You see corporations making record profits , with CEOs making record pay , but your paychecks have barely budged .
While many of you are working multiple jobs to make ends meet , you see the top 25 hedge fund managers making more than all of America 's kindergarten teachers combined .
And , often paying a lower tax rate . So , you have to wonder :
When does my hard work pay off ? When does my family get ahead When ?
I say now . Prosperity can't be just for CEOs and hedge fund managers .
Democracy can't be just for billionaires and corporations . Prosperity and democracy are part of your basic bargain too .
You brought our country back . Now it 's time your time to secure the gains and move ahead .
And , you know what ? America can't succeed unless you succeed .
That is why I am running for president of the United States .
Here , on Roosevelt Island , I believe we have a continuing rendezvous with destiny .
Each American and the country we cherish . I 'm running to make our economy work for you and for every American .
For the successful and the struggling . For the innovators and inventors .
For those breaking barriers in technology and discovering cures for diseases .
For the factory workers and food servers who stand on their feet all day .
For the nurses who work the night shift . For the truckers who drive for hours and the farmers who feed us .
For the veterans who served our country . For the small business owners who took a risk .
For everyone who 's ever been knocked down but refused to be knocked out .
I 'm not running for some Americans but for all Americans .
Our country 's challenges didn't begin with the Great Recession , and they won't end with the recovery .
For decades , Americans have been buffeted by powerful currents .
Advances in technology and the rise of global trade have created whole new areas of economic activity and opened new markets for our exports , but they have also displaced jobs and undercut wages for millions of Americans .
The financial industry and many multinational corporations have created huge wealth for a few by focusing too much on shor t-t erm profit and too little on long-term value too much on complex trading schemes and stock buybacks , too little on investments in new businesses , jobs , and fair compensation .
Our political system is so paralyzed by gridlock and dysfunction that most Americans have lost confidence that anything can actually get done .
And they 've lost trust in the ability of both government and Big Business to change course .
Now , we can blame historic forces beyond our control for some of this , but the choices we 've made as a nation , leaders and citizens alike , have also played a big role .
Our next president must work with Congress and every other willing partner across our entire country .
And I will do just that to turn the tide so these currents start working for us more than against us .
At our best , that 's what Americans do . We 're problem solvers , not deniers .
We don't hide from change , we harness it . But we can't do that if we go back to the top-down economic policies that failed us before .
Americans have come too far to see our progress ripped away .
Now , there may be some new voices in the presidential Republican choir , but they 're all singing the same old song
A song called Yesterday . You know the one all our troubles look as though they 're here to stay and we need a place to hide away They believe in yesterday .
And you 're lucky I didn't try singing that , too , I 'll tell you !
These Republicans trip over themselves promising lower taxes for the wealthy and fewer rules for the biggest corporations without regard for how that will make income inequality even worse .
We 've heard this tune before . And we know how it turns out .
Ask many of these candidates about climate change , one of the defining threats of our time , and they 'll say : I 'm not a scientist .
Well , then , why don't they start listening to those who are ?
They pledge to wipe out tough rules on Wall Street , rather than rein in the banks that are still too risky , courting future failures .
In a case that can only be considered mass amnesia .
They want to take away health insurance from more than 16 million Americans without offering any credible alternative .
They shame and blame women , rather than respect our right to make our own reproductive health decisions .
They want to put immigrants , who work hard and pay taxes , at risk of deportation .
And they turn their backs on gay people who love each other .
Fundamentally , they reject what it takes to build an inclusive economy .
It takes an inclusive society . What I once called a village that has a place for everyone .
Now , my values and a lifetime of experiences have given me a different vision for America .
I believe that success isn't measured by how much the wealthiest Americans have but by how many children climb out of poverty
How many startups and small businesses open and thrive How many young people go to college without drowning in debt
How many people find a good job How many families get ahead and stay ahead .
I didn't learn this from politics . I learned it from my own family .
My mother taught me that everybody needs a chance and a champion .
She knew what it was like not to have either one .
Her own parents abandoned her , and by 14 she was out on her own , working as a housemaid .
Years later , when I was old enough to understand , I asked what kept her going .
You know what her answer was ? Something very simple : kindness from someone who believed she mattered .
The first grade teacher who saw she had nothing to eat at lunch and , without embarrassing her , brought extra food to share .
The woman whose house she cleaned letting her go to high school so long as her work got done .
That was a bargain she leapt to accept . And , because some people believed in her , she believed in me .
That 's why I believe with all my heart in America and in the potential of every American .
To meet every challenge . To be resilient no matter what the world throws at you .
To solve the toughest problems . I believe we can do all these things because I 've seen it happen .
As a young girl , I signed up at my Methodist Church to babysit the children of Mexican farmworkers , while their parents worked in the fields on the weekends .
And later , as a law student , I advocated for Congress to require better working and living conditions for farm workers whose children deserved better opportunities .
My first job out of law school was for the Children 's Defense Fund .
I walked door-to-door to find out how many children with disabilities couldn't go to school and to help build the case for a law guaranteeing them access to education .
As a leader of the Legal Services Corporation , I defended the right of poor people to have a lawyer .
And saw lives changed because an abusive marriage ended or an illegal eviction stopped .
In Arkansas , I supervised law students who represented clients in courts and prisons , organized scholarships for single parents going to college , led efforts for better schools and healthcare , and personally knew the people whose lives were improved .
As senator , I had the honor of representing brave firefighters , police officers , EMTs , construction workers , and volunteers ( cheers , applause ) who ran toward danger on 9/11 and stayed there , becoming sick themselves .
It took years of effort , but Congress finally approved the health care they needed .
There are so many faces and stories that I carry with me of people who gave their best and then needed help themselves .
Just weeks ago , I met another person like that , a single mom juggling a job and classes at community college while raising three kids .
She doesn't expect anything to come easy . But she did ask me : What more can be done so it isn't quite so hard for families like hers ?
I want to be her champion and your champion . If you 'll give me the chance , I 'll wage and win four fights for you .
The first is to make the economy work for everyday Americans , not just those at the top .
To make the middle class mean something again , with rising incomes and broader horizons .
And to give the poor a chance to work their way into it .
The middle class needs more growth and more fairness . Growth and fairness go together .
For lasting prosperity , you can't have one without the other .
Is this possible in today 's world ? I believe it is , or I wouldn't be standing here .
Do I think it will be easy ? Of course not .
But , here 's the good news : There are allies for change everywhere who know we can't stand by while inequality increases , wages stagnate , and the promise of America dims .
We should welcome the support of all Americans who want to go forward together with us .
There are public officials who know Americans need a better deal .
Business leaders who want higher pay for employees , equal pay for women , and no discrimination against the LGBT community either .
There are leaders of finance who want less shor t-t erm trading and more long-term investing .
There are union leaders who are investing their own pension funds in putting people to work to build tomorrow 's economy .
We need everyone to come to the table and work with us .
In the coming weeks , I 'll propose specific policies to :
Reward businesses that invest in long term value rather than the quick buck because that leads to higher growth for the economy , higher wages for workers , and yes , bigger profits ; everybody will have a better time .
I will rewrite the tax code so it rewards hard work and investments here at home , not quick trades or stashing profits overseas .
I will give new incentives to companies that give their employees a fair share of the profits their hard work earns .
We will unleash a new generation of entrepreneurs and small business owners by providing tax relief , cutting red tape , and making it easier to get a small business loan .
We will restore America to the cutting edge of innovation , science , and research by increasing both public and private investments .
And we will make America the clean energy superpower of the 21st century .
Developing renewable power wind , solar , advanced biofuels
Building cleaner power plants , smarter electric grids , greener buildings
Using additional fees and royalties from fossil fuel extraction to protect the environment
And ease the transition for distressed communities to a more diverse and sustainable economic future from coal country to Indian country , from small towns in the Mississippi Delta to the Rio Grande Valley to our inner cities , we have to help our fellow Americans .
Now , this will create millions of jobs and countless new businesses and enable America to lead the global fight against climate change .
We will also connect workers to their jobs and businesses .
Customers will have a better chance to actually get where they need and get what they desire with roads , railways , bridges , airports , ports , and broadband brought up to global standards for the 21st century .
We will establish an infrastructure bank and sell bonds to pay for some of these improvements .
Now , building an economy for tomorrow also requires investing in our most important asset , our people , beginning with our youngest .
That 's why I will propose that we make preschool and quality childcare available to every child in America .
And I want you to remember this , because to me , this is absolutely the most compelling argument why we should do this .
Research tells us how much early learning in the first five years of life can impact lifelong success .
In fact , 80 percent of the brain is developed by age three .
One thing I 've learned is that talent is universal you can find it anywhere but opportunity is not .
Too many of our kids never have the chance to learn and thrive as they should and as we need them to .
Our country won't be competitive or fair if we don't help more families give their kids the best possible start in life .
So let 's staff our primary and secondary schools with teachers who are second to none in the world and receive the respect they deserve for sparking the love of learning in every child .
Let 's make college affordable and available to all and lift the crushing burden of student debt .
Let 's provide lifelong learning for workers to gain or improve skills the economy requires , setting up many more Americans for success .
Now , the second fight is to strengthen America 's families , because when our families are strong , America is strong .
And today 's families face new and unique pressures . Parents need more support and flexibility to do their job at work and at home .
I believe you should have the right to earn paid sick days .
I believe you should receive your work schedule with enough notice to arrange child care or take college courses to get ahead .
I believe you should look forward to retirement with confidence , not anxiety .
That you should have the peace of mind that your healthcare will be there when you need it , without breaking the bank .
I believe we should offer paid family leave so no one has to choose between keeping a paycheck and caring for a new baby or a sick relative .
And it is way past time to end the outrage of so many women still earning less than men on the job and women of color often making even less .
This isn't a women 's issue . It 's a family issue .
Just like raising the minimum wage is a family issue .
Expanding childcare is a family issue . Declining marriage rates is a family issue .
The unequal rates of incarceration is a family issue . Helping more people with an addiction or a mental health problem get help is a family issue .
In America , every family should feel like they belong .
So we should offer hard-working , law-abiding immigrant families a path to citizenship .
Not second-class status . And , we should ban discrimination against LGBT Americans and their families so they can live , learn , marry , and work just like everybody else .
You know , America 's diversity , our openness , our devotion to human rights and freedom is what 's drawn so many to our shores .
What 's inspired people all over the world . I know .
I 've seen it with my own eyes . And these are also qualities that prepare us well for the demands of a world that is more interconnected than ever before .
So we have a third fight : to harness all of America 's power , smarts , and values to maintain our leadership for peace , security , and prosperity .
No other country on Earth is better positioned to thrive in the 21st century .
No other country is better equipped to meet traditional threats from countries like Russia , North Korea , and Iran and to deal with the rise of new powers like China .
No other country is better prepared to meet emerging threats from cyber attacks , transnational terror networks like ISIS , and diseases that spread across oceans and continents .
As your president , I 'll do whatever it takes to keep Americans safe .
And if you look over my left shoulder you can see the new World Trade Center soaring skyward .
As a senator from New York , I dedicated myself to getting our city and state the help we needed to recover .
And as a member of the Armed Services Committee , I worked to maintain the bes t-t rained , best-equipped , strongest military , ready for today 's threats and tomorrow 's .
And when our brave men and women come home from war or finish their service , I 'll see to it that they get not just the thanks of a grateful nation but the care and benefits they 've earned .
I 've stood up to adversaries like Putin and reinforced allies like Israel .
I was in the Situation Room on the day we got bin Laden .
But , I know I know we have to be smart as well as strong .
Meeting today 's global challenges requires every element of America 's power , including skillful diplomacy , economic influence , and building partnerships to improve lives around the world with people , not just their governments .
There are a lot of trouble spots in the world , but there 's a lot of good news out there too .
I believe the future holds far more opportunities than threats if we exercise creative and confident leadership that enables us to shape global events rather than be shaped by them .
And we all know that in order to be strong in the world , though , we first have to be strong at home .
That 's why we have to win the fourth fight reforming our government and revitalizing our democracy so that it works for everyday Americans .
We have to stop the endless flow of secret , unaccountable money that is distorting our elections , corrupting our political process , and drowning out the voices of our people .
We need justices on the Supreme Court who will protect every citizen 's right to vote , rather than every corporation 's right to buy elections .
If necessary , I will support a constitutional amendment to undo the Supreme Court 's decision in Citizens United .
I want to make it easier for every citizen to vote .
That 's why I 've proposed universal , automatic registration and expanded early voting .
I 'll fight back against Republican efforts to disempower and disenfranchise young people , poor people , people with disabilities , and people of color .
What part of democracy are they afraid of ? No matter how easy we make it to vote , we still have to give Americans something worth voting for .
Government is never going to have all the answers but it has to be smarter , simpler , more efficient , and a better partner .
That means access to advanced technology so government agencies can more effectively serve their customers , the American people .
We need expertise and innovation from the private sector to help cut waste and streamline services .
There 's so much that works in America . For every problem we face , someone somewhere in America is solving it .
Silicon Valley cracked the code on sharing and scaling a while ago .
Many states are pioneering new ways to deliver services . I want to help Washington catch up .
To do that , we need a political system that produces results by solving problems that hold us back , not one overwhelmed by extreme partisanship and inflexibility .
Now , I 'll always seek common ground with friend and opponent alike .
But I 'll also stand my ground when I must .
That 's something I did as senator and secretary of state whether it was working with Republicans to expand health care for children and for our National Guard , or improve our foster care and adoption system , or pass a treaty to reduce the number of Russian nuclear warheads that could threaten our cities and it 's something I will always do as your president .
We Americans may differ , bicker , stumble , and fall ; but we are at our best when we pick each other up , when we have each other 's back .
Like any family , our American family is strongest when we cherish what we have in common and fight back against those who would drive us apart .
People all over the world have asked me : How could you and President Obama work together after you fought so hard against each other in that long campaign ?
Now , that is an understandable question considering that in many places , if you lose an election you could get imprisoned or exiled even killed not hired as secretary of state .
But President Obama asked me to serve , and I accepted because we both love our country .
That 's how we do it in America . With that same spirit , together , we can win these four fights .
We can build an economy where hard work is rewarded .
We can strengthen our families . We can defend our country and increase our opportunities all over the world .
And we can renew the promise of our democracy . If we all do our part .
In our families , in our businesses , unions , houses of worship , schools , and , yes , in the voting booth .
I want you to join me in this effort . Help me build this campaign and make it your own .
Talk to your friends , your family , your neighbors .
Text JOIN J-O-I-N to 4-7-2-4-6 . Go to hillaryclinton.com and sign up to make calls and knock on doors .
It 's no secret that we 're going up against some pretty powerful forces that will do and spend whatever it takes to advance a very different vision for America .
But I 've spent my life fighting for children , families , and our country .
And I 'm not stopping now . ( Cheers , applause , chanting . )
You know , I know how hard this job is .
I 've seen it up close and personal . All our presidents come into office looking so vigorous .
And then we watch their hair grow grayer and grayer .
Well , I may not be the youngest candidate in this race .
But I will be the youngest woman president in the history of the United States !
And the first grandmother as well . And one additional advantage : You won't see my hair turn white in the White House .
I 've been coloring it for years ! So I 'm looking forward to a great debate among Democrats , Republicans , and Independents .
I 'm not running to be a president only for those Americans who already agree with me .
I want to be a president for all Americans . And along the way , I 'll just let you in on this little secret .
I won't get everything right . Lord knows , I 've made my share of mistakes .
Well , there 's no shortage of people pointing them out !
And I certainly haven't won every battle I 've fought .
But leadership means perseverance and hard choices . You have to push through the setbacks and disappointments and keep at it .
I think you know by now that I 've been called many things by many people quitter is not one of them .
Like so much else in my life , I got this from my mother .
When I was a girl , she never let me back down from any bully or barrier .
In her later years , Mom lived with us , and she was still teaching me the same lessons .
I 'd come home from a hard day at the Senate or the State Department , sit down with her at the small table in our breakfast nook , and just let everything pour out .
And she would remind me why we keep fighting , even when the odds are long and the opposition is fierce .
I can still hear her saying : Life 's not about what happens to you , it 's about what you do with what happens to you so get back out there .
She lived to be 92 years old , and I often think about all the battles she witnessed over the course of the last century all the progress that was won because Americans refused to give up or back down .
She was born on June 4 , 1919 before women in America had the right to vote .
But on that very day , after years of struggle , Congress passed the constitutional amendment that would change that forever .
The story of America is a story of hard-fought , hard-won progress .
And it continues today . New chapters are being written by men and women who believe that all of us not just some , but all should have the chance to live up to our God-given potential .
Not only because we 're a tolerant country , or a generous country , or a compassionate country , but because we 're a better , stronger , more prosperous country when we harness the talent , hard work , and ingenuity of every single American .
I wish my mother could have been with us longer .
I wish she could have seen Chelsea become a mother herself .
I wish she could have met Charlotte . I wish she could have seen the America we 're going to build together .
An America , where if you do your part , you reap the rewards .
Where we don't leave anyone out , or anyone behind .
An America where a father can tell his daughter : Yes , you can be anything you want to be .
Even president of the United States . Thank you all .
God bless you . And may God bless America . Hillary was joined at the rally by Congressman John Lewis , Atlanta Mayor Kasim Reed , Georgia House Minority Leader Stacey Abrams , former NBA player Grant Hill and R&B artists Usher and Monica .
Thank you . Hello , Atlanta ! Thank you all so much .
I am thrilled to be here at Clark Atlanta University , the heart of the AUC .
And I 'm happy to see a bunch of Panthers here .
How about Morehouse ? We got any Morehouse men here ?
And how about Spelman College ? These universities contribute so much to the community here in Atlanta and to our nation .
You have trained generations of distinguished leaders . And I applaud you because I know I love visiting a school founded by the Methodist Church nearly 150 years ago .
And I was delighted to hear about your Joseph E . Lowery Institute for Justice and Human Rights .
That is such a fitting tribute to a man who has devoted his life to advancing the values of equality and opportunity and dignity for all people .
So thanks to everyone at Clark Atlanta for hosting us today .
And I want to recognize and thank Congressman Hank Johnson and Congressman David Scott for being here .
We have other distinguished officials . And I particularly want to thank Mayor Reed for being here with us as well .
But I am filled with gratitude for my friend , your congressman , John Lewis being with us today .
You know , he sacrificed his own body to bear witness to injustice , and by doing so he forced all of America to bear witness as well .
I don't know that we will ever adequately be able to thank John for everything he 's done to make it possible for all of us to be here , and as you heard from Alexa Hurd , literally making it possible for her to be born in the hospital in Alabama where she was born .
Now , a few years back , Congressman Lewis took me to the new Paschal 's restaurant not far from here , where he reminisced about his fellow pioneers in the civil rights movement .
And it is an honor to have so many of those leaders with us today , like my friend Andrew Young , like the great preacher and pathbreaker , C . T . Vivian .
Hearing their voices as strong as ever for justice and equality does us all good .
And it reminds us of the voices we 've lost .
I want to thank Martin Luther King III and Dr. King 's sister for being with us today .
No person of conscience can come to Atlanta and not hear the words of this extraordinary man ringing in our minds and in our hearts .
As a teenager , I was privileged to hear Dr. King preach in Chicago .
I was taken to hear him by my youth minister in the Methodist Church I attended .
He spoke that evening in a sermon called Staying Awake through the Revolution .
Afterward , I stood in a long line to shake his hand and to look up into his face .
His grace and moral clarity were compelling . I can feel it still .
I know that there are differences in the world we live in today and in the challenges we face , but the leaders of the civil rights movement had it right : organizing , mobilizing and politicizing , using nonviolence , using the power of the feelings that come forward .
AUDIENCE MEMBERS : Black lives matter . HILLARY CLINTON :
And yes , they do . Yes , they do .
Yes , they do , and I 'm going to talk a lot about that in a minute .
Now , my friends , I am going to get to some very important points that actually prove that black lives do matter and we have to take action together .
And I hope that we 'll have a chance to talk more , as I have been meeting with activists from the Black Lives Matter movement .
But I want to recognize some of the women who were in the head of the civil rights movement back in the 1960s .
Let 's remember Coretta Scott King , who was there with her husband every step of the way .
Let 's remember the one and only Dr. Dorothy Height , who I served with on the board of the Children 's Defense Fund , the most elegant , unstoppable woman you will ever meet .
And here in Atlanta we are surrounded by so much history that it does inspire us to keep going , to keep chanting , to keep singing , because as the Scriptures tell us , never grow weary doing good .
So to all the young people here today , those who are listening and those who are singing , let me say this : We need you .
We need the promise of a rising generation of activists and organizers who are fearless in your advocacy and determination .
Actually , a few weeks ago , I sat down with some of the people here .
We had a very nice conversation . And they were full of energy and ideas , and they shared some of their experiences with me .
And I understand and I appreciate their passion and their urgency .
But as I told them then , we have to come together as a nation to make the changes that they are calling for .
You know , in that meeting a young woman said they spoke about being outsiders in their own country , and those words broke my heart , coming from someone so young .
And they also should stiffen our spines , because life does matter and we need to act like it matters .
And I know very well for many white Americans it is tempting to close our eyes to the truth , to believe that bigotry is largely behind us , that institutionalized racism no longer exists .
But as you know so well , despite our best efforts and our highest hopes , America 's long struggle with race is far from finished .
More than half a century after Rosa Parks sat and Dr. King marched and John Lewis bled , race still plays a significant role in determining who gets ahead in America and who gets left behind .
And the facts are really clear . You know , the median wealth for white families is more than $134 , 000 , for African American families it is just $11 , 000 , because African Americans are three times as likely as whites to be denied a mortgage .
African American men are far more likely to be stopped and searched by police , charged with crimes , and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men convicted of the same offenses .
Now , none of this is coincidence , my friends .
In Charleston , we saw racial terrorism reach even into a holy sanctuary .
And the names of young African American men and women cut down too young is a rebuke to us all .
Walter Scott shot in the back in South Carolina . Tamir Rice shot in a park in Ohio .
Unarmed and just 12 years old . Eric Garner choked to death after being stopped for selling cigarettes on a street in New York .
Freddie Gray , his spine nearly severed while in police custody in Baltimore .
And Sandra Bland , a young woman who knew her rights and did nothing wrong but still ended up dying in a Texas jail cell .
Now , ladies and gentlemen , I have some issues to discuss and some proposals to make .
If our friends will allow me to do it , they may actually find them to their liking .
You know , it 's important to say out loud what I 'm saying , because I believe all Americans , especially those of us with privilege and power , have a responsibility to face these facts .
And we need to do a better job , not assuming that our experiences are everyone else 's .
And we need all of us to try walking in one another 's shoes .
I 'm asking white parents to try to imagine what it would be like to sit your children down and have the talk .
Or how we 'd feel if people locked their car doors when we walked past .
Now , I know how I 'd feel if it was a child I knew who was manhandled by a police officer in school like we saw in South Carolina the other day .
I 'm talking about us exercising empathy to make it possible for people from every background , every race , every religion , to finally come together as one nation .
And let 's not pretend to ignore hard truths about race and justice in America .
We need to say them , own them , and then change them .
And that 's why I began my campaign with a speech about the need to restore balance and fairness to our criminal justice system .
One of my earliest jobs as a young lawyer was for the Children 's Defense Fund , studying the problem of young people incarcerated in adult jails in South Carolina .
And when I directed the University of Arkansas School of Law 's legal aid clinic , I advocated on behalf of prison inmates and poor families .
And I saw first-hand how our legal system can be stacked against those who have the least power and are the most vulnerable .
So what are we going to do about it ? If you see the toll on families , if you see the unfairness , then you 've got to come together
, you 've got to consider working for reform for the criminal justice system .
And even though it 's complex and urgent , the good news is we have a rare opportunity now at a time when you never see Democrats and Republicans agree on anything , there is a growing bipartisan movement in the Congress for commonsense reforms in our criminal justice system .
President Obama , Attorney General Eric Holder , and Attorney General Loretta Lynch have led the way , and senators on opposite ends of the political spectrum from Chuck Schumer and Cory Booker and Dick Durbin to Rand Paul and Mike Lee and Chuck Grassley are actually working together .
We need reform that can be felt on our streets and our courthouses , our jails , our prisons and our communities .
First , we need smart strategies to keep us safe while rebuilding trust between law enforcement and our communities , especially communities of color .
Let 's remember that everyone in every community benefits when there is respect for the law , and when everyone in every community is respected by the law .
I think President Obama 's Task Force on Policing is a good place to start , and across the country police officers are out there doing their jobs honorably , putting themselves on the line to save lives , demonstrating how we can protect people without resorting to unnecessary force .
We should learn from them and build on these examples .
Well , thank you . Thank you all very much .
I really appreciate it . And I appreciate the congressman and the mayor having my back .
So I 'm sorry , I appreciate their passion , but I 'm sorry they didn't listen because some of what they 've been demanding I am offering and intend to fight for as president .
For example , I will make sure that federal funds for state and local law enforcement are not used to buy weapons of war that have no place on the streets of our country .
I will also work to make sure every police department in the country has body cameras that will help protect good people on both sides of the lens .
I am also renewing my call that I started as a senator for the end to racial profiling across America once and for all .
And as president I will work with Congress to pass legislation to ban racial profiling by federal , state and local law enforcement .
It is wrong . It is demeaning , and it does not keep us safe or help solve crimes .
It 's time to put that practice behind us . We also have to end the era of mass incarceration as many law enforcement and other experts tell us .
We have 5 percent of the world 's population , and 25 percent of the incarcerated population in the world .
Of the more than 2 million Americans behind bars today , many are low-level offenders .
Keeping them in prison does little to reduce the crime , and it tears apart families and communities .
And it is tragic that one in every 28 children is now growing up with a parent in prison .
In the United States if we brought back our prison populations to where it was several decades ago we 'd also save money .
So if you don't care about the families and you don't care about the over-incarceration , then think about us saving $28 billion , because we no longer incarcerate people who should not be there in the first place .
So we have to work together to keep more non-violent drug offenders out of prison .
Last year the Sentencing Commission reduced recommended prison times for some drug crimes , but I think we need to go further .
For one we need to end private prisons and detention centers once and for all .
Protecting public safety is the core responsibility of the government and it should never be outsourced or left to unaccountable corporations .
And today I 'm also pledging to eliminate the disparity in sentencing still between crack and cocaine , which disproportionately impacts African Americans and puts too many people in prison .
We 're talking about two forms of the same drug it makes no sense to continue treating them differently .
Let 's finish the job and fix this . And third , as we reform our criminal justice system we can't forget about the families and communities that have been ravaged by crime , incarceration , and poverty .
And we have to pay special attention to the people who have done their time , they 're out and they 're trying to rebuild their lives .
Think of this , of the 600,000 prisoners who re-enter society every year up to 60 percent of them face long-term unemployment .
And that 's not just a problem for them and their families it 's a problem for all of us .
It leads to repeat offenses . It creates a culture of hopelessness .
People who have paid their debt to society need to be able to find jobs , not just closed doors and closed hearts .
And I 'm encouraged , because across the country employers like Walmart and Target , cities and states , even Republican governors like Chris Christie in New Jersey and Nathan Deal right here in Georgia are coming together to change this .
The ban the box movement is giving former prisoners a chance to compete for jobs on a fair basis , by delaying background checks on criminal history until later in the hiring process and as president I will carry this effort forward .
I will do what I can inside the federal government and with federal contractors to ban the box .
We believe in second chances , don't we ? So we need to seize this moment of bipartisan consensus to make a difference in people 's lives .
But we also need to look beyond the specific criminal justice reforms to the deep seated social and economic inequities that divide our country .
There , there is not as much consensus . I believe we need a comprehensive strategy to create opportunities in communities of color and to break the cradle to prison pipeline .
We need new investments in education and healthcare and housing and jobs in poor communities .
I have proposed what I 'm calling the New College Compact .
It will make college affordable and it will allow you to refinance your debt and save thousands of dollars .
And I also am including special financial support for historically black colleges and universities .
I am also going to work hard so that every family has access to high quality preschool to help children get ready to succeed .
I will fight to raise the minimum wage and , yes , I will finally guarantee equal pay for equal work for women in America .
And I want to make it easier for women and people of color to find the capital and support they need to become entrepreneurs and start small businesses .
So I 'm proposing new tax credits for businesses to invest in apprenticeships , especially for those providing opportunities to economically disadvantaged young people so that those young people not only can be trained , but be paid while they are being trained .
But , look , the Republicans oppose practically all of this .
They want to tear down the Affordable Care Act , which has extended healthcare to 18 million Americans .
They 're stopping us from doing anything to stop the gun violence in our communities that stalks our children .
Across the country Republican governors , legislators and political operatives are also doing everything they can to make it harder for young people and people of color to vote .
Now you look at John Lewis , look at what he did to make it possible for people to vote .
And yet across the country there are governors and legislatures trying to put the brakes on and undermine it .
Just recently in Alabama a strict new voter ID law went into effect , and then the state government decided to close many of the motor vehicle offices where you would get the IDs , and guess what they closed them in those counties with the biggest majorities of African Americans .
That is a blast from the Jim Crow past , and we 've got to stop it in its tracks .
And I think it 's fair to say all of the Republican candidates for president support economic policies that would further stack the deck for those at the top , and do little or nothing to help families in the middle class who are trying to work their way up .
And some talk in coded racial language about free stuff , about takers and losers .
They demonize President Obama and encourage the ugliest impulses of the paranoid fringe .
You 've heard this . We 've all heard this before .
It has no place in the politics of a great country , and it needs to stop .
Instead of demonizing President Obama , they ought to be thanking him for saving the economy .
You know , they want us all to have amnesia .
When he took office , we were losing 800,000 jobs every month .
Now six-and-a-half years later , we 've seen the creation of more than 13 million new jobs , and unemployment has been cut nearly in half .
Manufacturing jobs are coming back . There are tough new rules on insurance companies , Wall Street banks and polluters .
These are all achievements of the Obama presidency . Now I 'm proud , I 'm proud to be a Democrat .
And I 'm I 'm proud that when Democrats are in the White House , Americans do better .
They do better economically . And although I 'm not running for my husband 's third term , or Barack Obama 's third term , I 'm running for my first term , but I 'm running as a proud Democrat .
And I 'll tell you this , throughout this campaign and then in the White House , I 'll get up every single day and fight to defend the progress we 've made under President Obama and build on it and go even further .
I 'm aware there are some who say President Obama is on the wrong trajectory , that we need a course correction .
Well , I think that 's wrong . It plays right into the hands of Republicans who want to rip away everything we 've achieved .
We have to keep moving forward . We have to keep marching .
We have to keep organizing . We have to keep our eyes on what we need to do in the 21st century to give every child the chance to live up to his or her God-given potential no matter who they are , where they come from , or what they look like .
That is my mission as your president . That is what I am fighting for in this campaign .
You know , from the day I went to work at the Children 's Defense Fund , I have been passionate about doing everything I can to help kids , and maybe it 's because my own mother had such a terrible life .
She was a neglected , abandoned kid . Her parents didn't want her .
Her grandparents didn't want her . She ended up working as a maid when she was 14 .
Luckily she worked for somebody who let her continue going to high school so she could try to finish her education .
That 's as far as she got . But when I think about her life , I think about the lives of so many kids in our country today , and I want to work to even the odds for people who have the odds stacked against them .
I 'm just getting warmed up because , as I said in the debate , I 'm a progressive who likes to get things done , and I haven't won every battle , but I 've learned from them all , and I still believe , as a smart man once said , there 's nothing wrong with America that can't be cured by what 's right with America .
We have to change in order to do that . So my friends , it really comes down to this , if we 're going to repair the fraying fabric of our communities and rebuilding the bonds of trust and respect , every American needs to step up .
There are laws we should pass , programs we should fund .
But much of the real work is going to come around kitchen tables over the stories we tell each other , in our offices , in our factories , on our farms .
Those quiet moments where we have honest conversations with parents and children and friends and neighbors , because fundamentally what 's progress we make in our country is about the habits of our heart , how we treat each other , how we learn to see the humanity in those around us even if they are different from us , in fact especially if they are .
Most of all it 's how we teach our children how they see others , how they see humanity .
I 've got to tell you I think often about something Andy Young once told me .
We were together in Little Rock decades ago now . We were talking about the differences across the South during the civil rights movement .
There were a lot of communities that fought tooth and nail against integration and civil rights .
Andy said , you know , in Atlanta we made a different choice .
City leaders look at what was happening across the South , all the hate and the violence , and they said , you know , some place is going to get this right .
And then they 're going to make it big . We need to be that place .
And they adopted a slogan , The City Too Busy to Hate .
Well , that was pretty smart . And this city thrived .
It did become the face of the new South . We still have problems , we still have challenges .
But we need more cities too busy to hate . And we need a country too busy to hate .
It may be a big unusual for somebody running for president to say we need more love and kindness , but that 's exactly what I believe .
We need to be too busy to hate and too loving to ignore , too loving ever to turn our backs on each other and our country .
We need to come together . We have so many opportunities .
If we just look in each other 's eyes and listen to each other .
And then we roll up our sleeves and we get to work together .
So I 'm here to say thank you , thank you to this university , thank you to Atlanta , thank you to the pioneers of the civil rights movement , and to issue a challenge that all of us continue the work .
Let 's make sure we finish it in the names of our values and our love for America .
Thank you all . After winning the Nevada primary , Hillary Clinton gave victory remarks in Las Vegas , thanking her supporters and highlighting her agenda to break down barriers .
Thank you , Nevada ! Thank you so much ! Thank you so much !
I am so , so thrilled and so grateful to all my supporters out there .
Some may have doubted us , but we never doubted each other .
This one 's for you ! I want to congratulate Senator Sanders on a hard-fought race here .
And I want to thank each and every one of you .
You turned out in every corner of this state , with determination and purpose .
Hotel and casino workers who never wavered . Students with too much debt , and small business owners who never go off the clock .
Tens of thousands of men and women with kids to raise , bills to pay , and dreams that won't die .
This is your campaign . And it is it is a campaign to break down every barrier that holds you back .
We 're going to build ladders of opportunity in their place , so every American can go as far as your hard work can take you .
And to the thousands of volunteers and organizers who worked so hard in this state , to the more than 750,000 people who 've gone to HillaryClinton.com and contributed what you could , the vast majority giving less $100 , and to the millions of people across this country who are supporting our campaign , thank you from the bottom of my heart .
We hear you . We see you . We 're incredibly grateful to you because we 're in this together .
We look at our country and see so much that isn't working the way it should .
We see grandparents forced to choose between paying rent and buying medicine because a prescription drug company has increased prices 5,000 percent overnight .
We see African American families denied mortgages at nearly three times the rate of white families .
We see small towns and rural communities hollowed out by lost jobs and lost hopes .
We see a rising generation of young people coming of age in a world where opportunity seems out of reach .
And worst of all , we see children growing up in poverty or pain or fear .
Here in Nevada , a brave young girl told me how scared she is that her parents are could be deported .
In South Carolina , I met kids trying to learn in crumbling classrooms and neglected communities .
Then there 's Flint , Michigan , where children were poisoned by toxic water just because their governor wanted to save a little money .
So Americans , Americans are right to be angry . But we 're also hungry for real solutions .
In the campaign , you 've heard a lot about Washington and Wall Street .
We all want to get secret , unaccountable money out of politics .
That starts with appointing a new justice to the Supreme Court who will protect the right of every citizen to vote , not every corporation to buy elections .
And we also agree that Wall Street can never be allowed to threaten Main Street again .
No bank can be too big to fail , no executive can be too powerful to jail .
But if we listen to the voices of Flint and Ferguson , if we open our hearts to the families of Coal Country and Indian Country , if we listen to the hopes and heartaches of hardworking people across America , it 's clear there 's so much more to be done .
The truth is , we aren't a single-issue country . We need more than a plan for the big banks .
The middle class needs a raise , and we need more jobs .
We need jobs that pay well and can't be outsourced .
We can do it the entrepreneurs and small businesses . We can do it with new investments in manufacturing , infrastructure , and clean energy , especially here in Nevada , the center of solar power .
Some country going to be the clean energy superpower of the 21st century .
It 's either going to be China , Germany , or us and I want it to be us .
And it will be when I 'm president . We also have to do more to make it easier for parents to balance work and family , and break down barriers that keep so many people on the sidelines of the economy , especially women .
Don't you think we 've waited long enough ? It 's time for equal pay for equal work !
Don't you think it 's time to face head-on the reality of systemic racism and investing in communities that have been left out and left behind ?
that means reforming our criminal justice system , our immigration systems .
Ensuring that people with disabilities have the opportunity to work and fully participate in our society .
It means to make sure nothing holds you back not debt , not discrimination , not a deck stacked for those at the top .
Now , no one can get this done alone not even the President of the United States .
It 's got to be the mission of our entire nation .
I 've never believed in dividing America between us and them .
We 're all in this together . And we all have to do our part .
So let me say this to the men and women who run our country 's corporations : If you cheat your employees , exploit consumers , pollute our environment , or rip off the taxpayers , we 're going to hold you accountable .
But if you do the right things , invest in your workers , contribute to your communities , and help build a better America , we 're going to stand with you .
We 're going to go into the future together . We need more jobs .
We need more opportunity . And I want to say this to all the young people out there : I know what you 're up against .
If you left college with a ton of loans , it 's not enough just to make college more affordable .
You need help right now with the debt you already have .
That 's why I have a plan to cut your interest rates and cap payments so you never have to pay more than you can afford .
But I want you to I want you to think about this .
It can't be just about what we 're going to give you .
It has to be about what we 're going to build together .
Your generation is the most tolerant and connected our country has ever seen .
In the days ahead , we 'll propose new ways for more Americans to get involved in national service and give back to our communities , because every one of us has a role to play in building the future we want .
Washington is never going to have all the answers . But for every problem we face , someone somewhere in America is solving it .
And we need you to be part of that exciting journey we can make together .
We need the community activist who decides to run for school board .
The entrepreneur who stays instead of leaving a hometown who has seen better days .
We need millions of teachers and nurses , police officers and firefighters who get up every day and do quiet , heroic work to make our country a safer , fairer , better place .
It 's going to take each of us , working together , growing together , looking out for one another and lifting each other up .
Because there 's a basic truth about this country : America can only live up to its potential when each and every American has the chance to live up to our own potential , too .
Because there is a basic truth about America . It 's something that Bill and I have been the beneficiaries of , that we have tried to contribute to and do all we could to continue .
America can only live up to its potential when each and every American has the chance to live up to your potential , too .
So imagine , imagine a tomorrow where no child grows up in the shadow of discrimination or under the specter of deportation . and every child in every zip code gets the education he or she needs and deserves .
Imagine a tomorrow where every parent can find a good job and every grandparent can enjoy a secure retirement .
Where small businesses thrive , and big businesses play by the rules and give more back to the country that has given them so much .
Where hard work is honored , families are supported and communities are strong .
With your help , that is the tomorrow we will build for our country .
Please join us . Go to HillaryClinton.com and become a part of this campaign .
Or text 47246 , JOIN , right now . Now I am heading on I am on my way to Texas .
I 'm on my way to Texas . Bill is on his way to Colorado .
The fight goes on . The future that we want is within our grasp .
Thank you , all . God bless you ! Thank you .
Thank you all so much . What a Super Tuesday .
You know , all across our country today , Democrats voted to break down barriers so we can all rise together , and I am so delighted to be here with you in Florida .
I congratulate Senator Sanders on his strong showing and campaigning , and I 'm grateful to all of you who voted for me .
To the volunteers and organizers , I know you 've worked your hearts out , and to all my friends , many of a lifetime , who traveled to all the states to tell people about the candidate they knew , and to the hundreds of thousands of people who went to HillaryClinton.com to give what they could .
Most less than $100 . Now this campaign moves forward to the Crescent City , the Motor City , and beyond .
We 're going to work for every vote and we will need all of you to keep volunteering , contributing , doing everything you can , talking to your friends and neighbors because this country belongs to all of us , not just those at the top , not just to people who look one way , worship one way , or even think one way .
America prospers when we all prosper . America is strong when we 're all strong .
And we know we 've got work to do . But that work , that work is not to make America great again .
America never stopped being great . We have to make America whole .
We have to fill in , fill in what 's been hollowed out .
You know , we have to make strong the broken places , re-stitch the bonds of trust and respect across our country .
It might be unusual as I 've said before , for a presidential candidate to say this , but I 'm going to keep saying it .
I believe what we need in America today is more love and kindness .
Because you know what ? It works . Instead of building walls , we 're going to break down barriers and build ladders of opportunity and empowerment so every American can live up to his or her potential , because then , and only then , can America live up to its full potential , too .
Now , it 's clear tonight that the stakes in this election have never been higher .
And the rhetoric we 're hearing on the other side has never been lower .
Trying to divide America between us and them is wrong , and we 're not going to let it work .
You know , whether we like it or not , we 're all in this together , my friends , and we all have to do our part .
But unfortunately , too many of those with the most wealth and the most power in this country today seem to have forgotten that basic truth about America .
Yesterday I was at the Old South Meeting House in Boston , where nearly two and a half centuries ago , American patriots organized the original Tea Party .
And I had to wonder : What they would make of corporations that seem to have absolutely no loyalty to the country that gave them so much ? What would they say about student loan companies that overcharge young people struggling to get out of debt ?
Even young men and women serving our country in the military .
Or corporations that shift their headquarters overseas to avoid paying their fair share of taxes .
Like Johnson Controls , an auto parts company from Wisconsin , that all of us , we taxpayers , helped to bail out with the auto rescue back in 2008 .
Now they 're turning their back on America . Now , I 'm not interested in condemning whole categories of people or businesses .
I 'm just interested in making things right . So let there be no doubt , if you cheat your employees , exploit consumers , pollute our environment , or rip off the taxpayers , we 're going to hold you accountable .
But if you do the right thing , if you invest in your workers and in America 's future , then we 'll stand with you .
We all need to work together to break down the barriers holding back our families and our country because the middle class needs a raise .
And more good jobs . Jobs that pay enough for a family to live on , even put a little away for retirement .
Jobs that provide dignity and a bright future . That 's why we have to invest in manufacturing and infrastructure and small business and clean energy , enough clean energy to power every home in America .
Don't let anybody tell you we can't make things in America anymore , because we can , we are , and we will .
And together we can break down the barriers that face working-class families across America , especially in struggling Rust Belt communities and small Appalachian towns that have been hollowed out by lost jobs and lost hope .
Families who for generations kept our lights on and our factories running .
Together , we can break down barriers for our kids so they get the education they need and deserve .
Every child in America should have a great school and a great teacher no matter what zip code they live in .
Together , we can break down barriers for women and finally guarantee equal pay for equal work .
And we can we can break down barriers for families who 've seen too many black children harassed , humiliated , and even killed .
We can break down barriers for voters in North Carolina who 've been systemically disenfranchised and disempowered .
We can break down barriers for hardworking immigrants everywhere , who are too often exploited and intimidated .
We have to defend all our rights workers ' rights and women 's rights , civil rights and voting rights , LGBT rights and rights for people with disabilities .
And that starts by standing with President Obama when he nominates a strong , progressive justice to the Supreme Court .
I know , I know too many Americans have lost faith in our future .
We hear it in the voices of parents who don't know how they 're going to give their kids the opportunities they deserve .
We see it in the eyes of working men and women who don't expect anything to come easy , but wonder why it has to be quite so hard .
Like many of you , I find strength and purpose in the values I learned from my family and my faith .
They gave me simple words to live by , an old Methodist saying : do all the good you can for all the people you can for as long as you can .
and that is why that is why I believe deeply that if we resist the forces trying to drive us apart , we can come together to make this country work for everyone the struggling , the striving , and the successful .
If we all do our part , we can restore our common faith in our common future , that 's the spirit powering this campaign .
It comes from the young janitor in Arkansas who stopped buying junk food and put off getting a haircut so he could contribute to it .
It comes from the disabled combat veteran from Nebraska who sent in $10 .
In 70 years of his life , he had never donated to a political campaign until now .
You can join us , too . Please , go to HillaryClinton.com, make a donation , text JOIN to 47246 .
And let me leave you with a story that has inspired so many of us .
By now , we all know what happened in Flint , Michigan , don't we ?
How a city 's children were poisoned by toxic water because their governor wanted to save a little money .
But there 's another story in Flint : it 's a story of a community that 's been knocked down but refused to be knocked out .
It is it is hundreds of union plumbers coming from across the country to help install new water fixtures .
It 's students raising funds for water deliveries and showing up to distribute supplies .
It 's the United Auto Workers and General Motors donating millions of dollars to help .
And when I visited Flint a few weeks ago , I went to the House of Prayer Missionary Baptist Church .
The congregation locked arms and sang , We 've come too far from where we started from .
They 're not about to quit now . We know there are many other Flints out there , communities that are hurting and need help .
But we 've come too far in this country to let us turn back .
We 're going to build on the progress that we 've made .
We saved the auto industry thanks to President Obama , now we 've got to create new jobs and industries of the future .
We 've now insured 90 percent of Americans thanks to President Obama , Now we have to finish the job and get to 100 percent .
We have come too far to stop now . We 've got to keep going , keep working , keep breaking down those barriers and imagine what we can build together when each and every American has the chance to live up to his or her own God-given potential .
Thank you , all , so very much . Thank you !
Thank you . Wow . I am so excited to be here .
And I appreciate the short tour that I just had and the information that I was given .
I want to thank Detroit Manufacturing Services for welcoming us here today , and I want to thank them especially for giving so many hardworking people the chance to make a good living with a good job with benefits and union representation .
It all adds up . I want to thank Andra Rush , the CEO of DMS . I want to acknowledge this is the largest woman-owned business in Michigan and one of the largest Native American-owned businesses in America .
It 's also great to be here with so many of my friends , my former colleagues .
I 'm thrilled to be in Detroit . I want to thank the mayor .
Where is the mayor ? Mayor . Thank you , Mayor Duggan , for everything you 're doing .
I want to thank Senator Debbie Stabenow , my friend and colleague Congressman John Conyers he 's got that red jacket on , you can see him .
Congresswoman Brenda Lawrence , thank you . My long-time friend , Congresswoman Debbie Dingell .
And of course , I want to recognize a legend .
Now you may think I 'm talking about his storied career in the Congress , and of course I am .
But I want you to know that former Congressman John Dingell is a social media sensation .
He is the king of Twitter . And I 'm so pleased he 's here today .
I want to hank former Governor Jim Blanchard and Janet Blanchard .
And we have some great union leaders here . We have the former president of the UAW , Bob King .
Thank you , Bob , for being here . We have the president of SCIU here in the state , Marge Robinson .
And the president of AFSCME , Council 25 , Al Garrett , thank you all for being with me .
Now , I deliberately chose to come to Detroit and to come to this company to talk about jobs .
Because I want more people to see what 's happening in southwest Detroit and Midtown and Eastern Market .
New businesses are opening , families are moving in , the street lights are on again , the buses are running , there is a palpable feeling of pride and community .
And we have to spread the economic revitalization to all of Detroit 's neighborhoods .
And you can do it , because look how far you 've come .
Thanks to your hard work , the auto industry just had its best year ever .
Innovation is on the rise . Between the car makers and suppliers , the clean energy sector , the defense corridor , high tech firms in Ann Arbor , cutting edge design happening in Grand Rapids , the next generation of engineers getting trained up in Houghton and so much else , your hard work , doing what you 've always done , making and designing things that America needs and the world wants is once again going strong , and I am so grateful to everybody who played a part in that .
Now last night , Detroit played a different role , didn't it ?
Hosting the Republican presidential I don't know what to call it , I guess debate .
There were so many insults flying back and forth , it was hard to keep track .
But the biggest insult of all was to the American people .
The economy , which should be at the top of any list that anybody running for president has was basically an afterthought .
Maybe that 's because all the Republican candidates support the same failed policies : cut taxes for the rich , get out of the way of corporations , don't raise the minimum wage in fact , the frontrunner says he thinks wages are too high in our country and slash government to the bone .
Now surprise they 've all criticized or opposed the auto rescue .
What was missing last night is an honest reckoning with the most important economic challenge we face .
How do we raise incomes and create the good jobs of the future ?
Now on the Democratic side , we agree on a number of things .
But I don't think we can answer that question by refighting battles from 20 years ago .
Anyone running for president owes it to you to come up with real ideas , not an ideology , not an old set of talking points , but a credible strategy designed for the world we live in now .
And that 's exactly what I 'm here today to do .
In America , if you work hard and you do your part , you 're supposed to be able to get ahead and stay ahead no matter who you are or where you started out .
That 's the basic bargain that made this country great .
But for many Americans , that no longer holds true .
Too many barriers hold back our families , our economy , and because of that , our country .
Instead of good paying jobs , millions of Americans are stuck in low-wage work .
Now corporate profits and CEO pay keeps rising , but paychecks for working families have barely budged .
And instead of affordable college , we have skyrocketing tuition and millions of people weighed down by student debt .
More women than ever are the main breadwinners or co-breadwinners , but they still don't get equal pay .
And the unions that helped build our country and the middle class are under concerted attack .
And it 's no surprise that Americans are angry , is it ?
Folks work hard all day , then lie awake all night trying to figure out how in the world they 're going to pay for their kids ' college , or a new roof , or making sure mom gets the care she needs .
And for some parents , it 's even worse . They have to worry about whether the water their kids drink is poisonous , like the families in Flint .
Or about their kids ' schools that are crumbling and rodent-infested , like too many here in Detroit .
That is not the way it is supposed to be in America .
Now , some of the blame for these changes in the economy rest with big , historic forces , like trade and technology .
Wall Street and some of our corporations also , however , bear a lot of responsibility .
Too many in the financial industry forgot that the purpose of banking is to get capital to main street to invest in new businesses or expand successful ones like this of any size , and to increase the opportunity for home ownership and community development .
It is not to create huge riches for a select few at the expense of everyone else .
And meanwhile , too many leaders in corporate America are prioritizing their shor t-t erm stock price over their workers and their communities .
And we can't forget the damage caused by trickle-down economics and right-wing ideologues who believe in weakening government oversight , massive tax cuts for the rich , ripping away the safety net , and breaking the backs of unions .
But as Detroit proves every day , what has been broken can be rebuilt , stronger than before .
Throughout this campaign , I 've said that creating good-paying jobs and raising incomes is the defining economic challenge of our time , and that in order to get where I want us to go , we need growth that is strong , fair , and long-term .
That 's why we need a new bargain for the new economy .
A new bargain to ensure that the jobs of the future are good-paying American jobs .
The kind that provide both good incomes and the dignity , pride and sense of purpose that come when you have something to look forward to when you get up in the morning .
And the people that I met as I was walking here with Ed were all people who fit that description , proud of what they 're doing , grateful for the opportunity to be part of a team that respects one another , looking to continue the growth that this company has enjoyed .
So that 's the kind of jobs we want , and you 're creating them again in Michigan .
Some of the most exciting technological breakthroughs are happening right here not in China , not in Germany , but in Michigan .
You used to make B-24 bombers at Willow Run . Now you 're developing driverless cars there .
At Ventower in Monroe , you 're making the towers that make wind turbines possible .
Chevy is making electric cars in Hamtramck and using clean energy to do it .
Shinola has created more than 500 jobs , and they 've cornered the market on watches for presidents .
Both my husband and President Obama love their Shinolas . So Michigan proves every day that American workers are the best in the world .
All they need is a fair chance on a fair playing field .
That 's why we need this new bargain , and here 's what it should be .
First , corporations have to do right by their communities and our country .
Corporations benefit in so many ways from being right here in the United States .
But too often , this relationship feels like a one-way street .
Too many are not holding up their end of the bargain .
They don't recognize that one of the biggest assets on their balance sheet in America .
And part of the problem is a casino culture on Wall Street that for too long puts shor t-t erm speculation ahead of long-term strength , and asks taxpayers to hold the bag when they bets go bad .
We need to make sure Wall Street never threatens Main Street again .
And as I have said may times , no bank can be too big to fail and no executive too powerful to jail .
But we also have to understand how bad behavior on Wall Street and pressure to meet quarterly earnings expectations contributes to bad behavior across corporate America .
Look at companies like Nabisco , laying off 600 workers in Chicago and moving their production line to Mexico , even though the company has long received tax breaks from the state of Illinois .
They have no problem taking taxpayer dollars with one hand and giving out pink slips with the other .
Look at the growing number of companies moving their headquarters overseas just so they can avoid paying their fair share of taxes here at home .
Now , one company doing that right now is called Johnson Controls , which makes car parts .
It actually lobbied for and benefitted from the auto rescue in 2008 .
They went to Washington , along with everybody else , and they asked for help .
The Republicans said , No . We 're not going to help .
President Obama and the Democrats said , Yes .
We will help . Millions of jobs and families are at stake .
So everybody here , all of us taxpayers , we helped save Johnson Controls .
And on their website , they talk about their contracts with the federal government .
And they say that keeping the country safe and prosperous is , and I quote ,
The patriotic thing to do . Well , I hope they do the patriotic thing and stay in America and pay the taxes that they owe for everything we 've done for them .
Now , look . I 'm not interested in condemning whole categories of businesses or the entire private sector .
Of course not . But I do want to send a clear message to every board room and executive suite .
If you cheat your employees , you exploit your customers , you pollute our environment or rip off the taxpayers , we will hold you accountable .
This country has given you so much . If you desert America , you 'll pay a price .
But do the right thing , invest in your workers and your country 's future , and we will stand with you .
And here 's how it should work . To discourage bad behavior , we 'll make companies pay for what are called inversions under the tax code , which means they pretend to sell themselves to a company overseas .
And then they pretend to move their headquarters overseas . I call it a perversion , but under the tax code it 's called an inversion .
And we will make you pay for that with a new exit tax .
And if a company like Nabisco outsources and ships jobs overseas , we 'll make you give back the tax breaks you received here in America .
If you aren't going to invest in us , why should taxpayers invest in you ?
Let 's take that money and put it to work in the communities that are being left behind .
And to encourage good behavior , let 's enact policies that promote long-term investment , like capital gains taxes that only scale downward for truly multi-year investments but are higher for shor t-t erm trading .
Let 's promote in-shoring , innovation , and investment with new tax credits that make it profitable to take the high road rather than the low , like Michigan Ladder Company , which has been operating in Ypsilanti for over a century .
They have stopped buying fiberglass ladders from suppliers in China and started making them here in Michigan .
I know it would make more financial sense , and we 've got to help other companies discover what they can do as well .
Now , I 'm not asking corporations to be charitable , although that 's important .
I 'm asking corporations to realize that when Americans prosper , they prosper , too .
The idea of corporate patriotism might sound quaint in an era of vast multinationals , but it 's the right thing to do and , I argue , the smart thing to do as well .
And that leads directly to the second part of the new bargain .
Companies have to start treating workers like assets to be investing in , not costs to be cut .
Look at what 's happening . These days , our biggest companies return eight or nine out of every ten dollars they earn directly back to shareholders , either in the form of dividends or stock buybacks .
And they 're also , many of them , sitting on huge cash reserves , often stashed in foreign tax havens .
That 's money they 're not using to train their workers or give them a raise .
Even worse , the link between rising productivity and rising pay has snapped .
Productivity goes up still . Profits go up . Executive pay goes up .
Stock prices go up . But workers are being left behind .
And in an economy that 's 70 percent consumption , that 's a big problem .
And it doesn't have to be that way . In the 1990s , when we had another Democratic President that I think did a good job , in the 1990s , when productivity rose , the typical family 's income also rose by $ 10,000 .
Some of you remember that . And in fact , African American family income went up as a higher percentage because there were so many jobs and people really making progress .
It 's good for everyone when workers ' incomes go up .
America grows when your paycheck grows . This is like fundamental Economics 101 .
More money in the hands of wealthy people just helps wealthy people .
More money in the hands of working people helps everyone , including businesses .
And that 's why we should raise the federal minimum wage and fight for even higher minimum wages in places where that makes sense .
It 's why we should provide incentives for companies that invest in high quality training for employees , which can lead to higher-paying jobs .
And we should create a tax credit for employers that share profits with their workers .
Auto makers here in Detroit know the value of transparent profit-sharing plans that come on top of good wages .
Now , we also have to take on a big reason why paychecks haven't moved and good jobs are still too scarce , and that is the diminishing power of labor unions .
As you know well , unions helped bring back the auto industry .
No one gave more to Detroit and Michigan during these past few years .
Union members build our cities , keep our lights on , educate our children , and care for our loved ones .
And the relentless assault on labor and the erosion of workers ' bargaining power has not only affected worker pay , it 's also a key reason why overtime rules haven't been updated in decades and why family-friendly policies like paid leave , earned sick days , and fair scheduling haven't been widely embraced .
And inequality , inequality has been widened by the decline of unions , too .
We need to stand up to Republicans in Washington and in state houses like here in Michigan who do everything they can to reduce unions ' power .
And we need to stand up for workers because when unions are strong , families are strong and America is strong .
The third part of the new bargain is government stepping up , too .
Too often Washington only works for the wealthy and the well-connected .
You know it . I know it . Everyone knows it .
Like what Republicans in Congress did when they cut off unemployment benefits for people laid off in the Great Recession who were still working , looking for work or when candidates promise trillions of dollars in tax cuts that go mostly to the rich .
This needs to change . American interests have to come before special interests .
And the American worker and American jobs have to come first .
And one area where we 've gotten this balance wrong over the years is trade .
The good news is America 's exports are up 40 percent under President Obama .
I was proud to work with him on that when I was secretary of state .
Because export jobs tend to pay better than non-export jobs , so there are real benefits there .
But looking back over the past decades as globalization picked up steam , there 's no doubt that the benefits of trade have not been as widely enjoyed as many predicted , especially when the Bush Administration failed to enforce our trade laws or stand up to China .
Corporations may have won , but many workers lost . They lost their jobs , they lost their sense of purpose .
Cheaper goods are no substitute for that . So America has to do better .
There are people in both parties who think we can somehow shut ourselves off from the world .
But even if the United States never signs another trade deal , globalization isn't going away .
Our challenge is to establish and enforce fair rules so that our workers compete on a level playing field and countries don't race to the bottom on labor , the environment and so much else .
The way we enforce trade rules right now is completely backward .
We 've put the burden of initiating trade cases on workers and unions .
And we don't take action until after the damage is done , which often means after workers is laid off .
That is ridiculous . The government should be enforcing the law from the beginning so workers can focus on doing their jobs .
And enforcing trade laws means dealing with one country above all , China .
Now when it comes to trade , China is , by far , the worst rule breaker in the world .
It dumps cheap products in our markets , subsidizes state-owned enterprises who undersell in the global market to hurt our companies , and it discriminates against American companies .
But now that China 's economy is slowing down , we can expect even more bad acts from them .
It will look to dump products overseas to make up for lost demand at home .
So we have to stop that right now , and we have to prevent not just China but other countries from manipulating their currencies to gain an unfair price advantage .
So I will do this . I will expand the ways we respond to currency manipulation to include effective new remedies like duties and tariffs .
Now I know something about dealing with China . I 've sat across a lot of tables from Chinese leaders , discussing and negotiating , even arguing about some of the toughest issues we face : nuclear weapons , cyberwarfare , human rights , currency , climate change and much more .
So I know firsthand that the relationship between our countries is the most complex and consequential in the world .
And the next president is going to need the judgment and experience to steer that relationship in the right direction on trade and everything else .
When it comes to trade deals , here 's my standard : I won't support any agreement unless it helps create good jobs and higher wages for American workers and protects our national security .
I need to be able to look into the eyes of any hardworking American anywhere in our country and say this deal will help raise your income .
That 's why I voted against the last big , multinational trade deal called CAFTA .
It 's why I don't support the Transpacific Partnership trade deal .
But our policiescan't just be about stopping trade abuses and outsourcing ; they also have to be about creating jobs and higher wages here at home .
And I agree with my esteemed opponent , Senator Sanders .
We need major new investments in infrastructure , and I put forth a $275 billion plan that would put millions of Americans to work modernizing our roads and bridges and railways and ports , finish the job of connecting all of our homes to high-speed internet .
And we will also rebuild our crumbling water systems in Flint and around the country .
I also want to create a national infrastructure bank to put private capital to work alongside taxpayer dollars .
We have so much work to be done in this country , we need everybody contributing .
And I also have a vision for a clean energy future .
The longer we wait to deal with climate change , the more expensive it gets .
But if we start today , we can create good paying jobs that can't be outsourced .
We can become the clean energy superpower of the 21st century .
And we can protect our kids ' health and futures in the bargain .
So far , so good , but that 's not enough .
We need to invest in dynamic sources of growth , like small businesses , manufacturing , and technology .
And I 'm the only candidate on either side in this race who has actually put forward a plan to support entrepreneurs and remove the barriers that stand in their way .
You see the power of small businesses right here in Michigan , with companies like Detroit Bikes and McClure 's Pickles .
They create jobs ; they make the city a more dynamic , attractive place .
But the sad truth is more dreams die in the parking lots of banks than anywhere else in America .
People come with a good idea , and they get turned away .
So we have to increase access to startup capital , give more help to community banks , so more entrepreneurs can get their dreams off the ground and compete for your business .
And one important tool to support both small and big business is the Export-Import Bank , which helps businesses reach new markets and compete for new customers .
Now , unfortunately , Republicans in Congress , along with Senator Sanders , have tried to kill it repeatedly .
He also stood with Republicans against another important job-creating tool , the New Market Tax Credit , which has helped steer investments into neglected communities .
Now that doesn't make sense to me . We should never let ideology get in the way of helping Americans find the good jobs they need and deserve .
So I think your next president has to offer a serious proposal to jumpstart manufacturing .
With the right policies and investments , we can ensure America continues to have the world 's most competitive auto and auto parts industries .
Now this is not a new fight for me . In the Senate , where I represented New York , I also represented some great manufacturing towns like Rochester and Buffalo .
I worked closely with likeminded senators , like Debbie Stabenow .
We reached across the aisle to start the bipartisan Manufacturing Caucus .
This is a priority for me , to help our manufacturers use all the latest science to forge stronger steel and weave tougher fabrics and make thinner , stronger glass , like they do at Corning Glass in upstate New York .
Now I remember how hard I had to work to protect jobs in Corning against China .
We had to battle the Chinese over intellectual property and fair competition .
We had to battle the Bush administration to actually go to bat for a blue chip American company .
But it was worth it , because good American jobs were at stake .
So companies like Corning show how technology can transform our economy for the better .
That creates entirely new industries , and it 's a powerful force for prosperity and improved quality of life .
The next 20 years are poised to be even more transformative than the last .
I think it 's exciting , and you can see that all over Michigan , in Ann Arbor and other places .
But you can't have a candid conversation about the jobs of the future without also talking about the challenges posed by technology automation and mechanization .
We 've got to harness technology as a force for good for all of us .
And as we lay the foundation for a brighter future , we have to deal with the legacy of the past .
There are still too many economic barriers that disproportionately hold back communities of color redlining in housing , segregation in schools , a huge opportunity gap .
We need a comprehensive commitment to invest in all communities , anywhere they have , that have too long been neglected .
And let 's work to replace the school-to-prison pipeline with a cradle-to-college pipeline .
And let 's help the millions of people coming home from prison every year find new jobs , not closed doors .
I want to work across our country , not only in urban communities , but in coal country , in Indian country .
I want to do everything I can to help immigrants who are forced to live in the shadows .
But here 's the bottom line creating good paying jobs has got to be a top priority .
We 've got to build on the progress we 've made under President Obama , over 70 straight months of private sector job creation , and as we learned this morning , more than 240,000 jobs just last month .
But you know what ? I 'm not taking that for granted .
We 've got to make sure we have much more in the pipeline , so that every American has a chance to get ahead and stay ahead .
And don't let anyone tell you we can't do this .
As I said , in the ' 90s , we made incomes rise for everyone .
We 've seen the auto industry pull together and recover from the brink of collapse to record sales .
We 've done this before . And I 'll tell you , when I hear people running for president who spend all their time badmouthing America , it really upsets me .
You know what ? We 've got work to do .
Instead of complaining , let 's join hands . Let 's lift ourselves up .
Let 's get going together . Let 's make a difference .
Let 's build tomorrow . Let 's make sure every American has the same chance to live up to his or her God-given potential .
Thank you all so much . Hello . Thank you all so much .
Wow , I 'll tell you what , I am thrilled to be here and I want to thank Congressman Butterfield for that enthusiastic introduction , but more than that , for his leadership in the Congress where he chairs the very important Congressional Black Caucus .
Thank you so much . I want to thank Bill Bell , your mayor ; Larry Hall , the House leader ; Christie Moore from the public schools , all of whom appeared before I came out , and I 'm grateful that they did .
Dr. Bert Lum , thank you for being superintendent . And Dr. William Logan , thank you for being principal of Hillside .
I want to thank Congressman David Price and his wife Lisa who are here .
And all the elected officials all of the state , county , and local officials .
I want to also thank some great friends Carolina and Richard Sullivan and Tom and Jill Hendrickson , and I particularly want to thank the Hillside High School choir , band , and dance ensemble .
It 's a real pleasure for me to be back in North Carolina to be here today .
I want to follow up where the congressman stopped . I 'm running for president to knock down every barrier that stands in your way to get ahead and stay ahead .
I am not a one-issue candidate , because this is not a one-issue country .
We have work to do . We need more good jobs with rising incomes for hardworking Americans .
That 's why I 'm proposing more jobs with infrastructure , manufacturing , and let 's combat climate change with more clean , renewable energy jobs .
And yes , let 's invest in more research right here in the Research Triangle .
You know what that can mean . And I want to do more for small business .
The fastest-growing segment of small business are minority and women-owned small businesses .
And let 's raise the minimum wage so that barrier gets knocked down so people who work full-time aren't left in poverty .
And what do you say we finally , finally guarantee equal pay for women 's work ?
One of the barriers some people still face has to do with health care .
I am very proud of President Obama 's success in establishing the Affordable Care Act .
And I will fight every attempt by the Republicans to hand our health care back to insurance companies .
I will also work to make the costs lower , the expenses lower , and I will take on the pharmaceutical drug industry 's increasing prices that are posing a great burden to all kinds of Americans , especially older Americans on Medicare .
Now , it 's important that we recognize we are now at 90 percent coverage .
We have never been this high , my friends . And when the Republicans talk about repealing it , they never tell you what they would replace it with , because they don't want you to know .
They would turn the clock back so that you could be denied health insurance if you have a preexisting condition .
They would make women once again pay more for our health care than men .
And there 's no guarantee that people up to the age of 26 would be able to stay on their parents ' policies , because that only happened due to the Affordable Care Act .
So we have a lot at stake . And I also believe we should not start over .
We should not in any way throw our country into a contentious debate about health care again .
So I will defend the Affordable Care Act . But here in this high school , this historic high school , I want to talk about another barrier the barrier of education .
Education should be the great door-opener , and yet we know it often doesn't turn out that way .
I think every child in this country deserves a good teacher in a good school regardless of the ZIP code you live in .
And I see my friend Kay Hagan here . I was proud to serve with her in the United States Senate .
And she told the truth when she ran for reelection .
She said these policies that the Republicans are pushing in North Carolina are going to undermine public education in this state .
And it 's only gotten worse in recent years . And I want to say something .
I spent 18 wonderful years in Arkansas . My husband was governor ; he asked me to chair a commission to try to improve education in our state because we were 49th , Mississippi was 50th .
We had a lot of schools that were really under-resourced .
Facilities were terrible . Kids did not get a chance to even know how far they could go .
And you know what we did ? We looked at North Carolina .
We looked at what was happening in public education in this state .
Because back in the 70s and the 80s and the early 90s , North Carolina was committed to improving its public schools .
And for the life of me , I don't know why the Republicans have such a problem with funding public schools to the extent that they should .
Because I recently looked at the numbers . Teachers ' salaries have been slashed in North Carolina .
You are now 46th in the nation in funding for public education .
Thousands of teachers who literally cannot make ends meet are leaving the profession .
So what was in many ways an incredible success story that people looked at and wanted to emulate , we watched your Republican governor and legislature slowly eroding the base for public education in this state .
And I will tell you this . Public education remains the foundation of our democracy , and we are going to fight for it .
I know you can't get good jobs with rising incomes unless you 've got a good public education system .
So when I talk about wanting to get the economy moving , create more opportunities , it goes hand in hand with education .
So let me tell you what I want to do .
If I am so fortunate to be your president , I want to be a good partner with teachers and principals and school boards and families and students .
And as a mother and a grandmother , I have an idea about what we need to do for public education .
You see , I think public education needs some TLC . Teaching , learning and community .
And here 's what I propose . I want to lead a national effort to recruit more young people and even mid-career people back into teaching by working to raise the salaries and the professionalism and the standing of our teachers .
Whenever you look at international rankings and you see countries like Finland or Singapore standing really tall in these international rankings , when you really look behind the numbers , what you find is this : teachers are treated with respect as the professionals that they are , playing the role they play in preparing our next generation .
So I want more good teachers . I want to help work with colleges of education and other ways of training teachers to create a teaching force second to none in the world .
And we are going to work hard to push states to reinvest in public schools , including in our teachers .
And what 's the L ' ? The L ' is for learning .
Let 's make clear we want to do what works .
I know that there are lots of theories about how best to teach kids , and different kids often need different kinds of help .
But we ought to look at the research about what works .
And we ought to be also providing opportunities for every student in every school .
So for example , every school district should offer computer science programs and coding programs for their students .
There will be more than a million jobs in computer science in the next 10 years .
I want the young people from everywhere , including Hillside , to be prepared to compete for those jobs .
I also want to go and get the best programs we can find anywhere in public schools , in good charter schools that are part of public school systems .
Let 's find the best programs . Let 's make sure we 're doing what works .
And then finally , when we think about learning , let 's start with early childhood education .
And the community has a big role to play . There 's been a lot of finger-pointing and scapegoating in public education , when really , you know what the problems are ?
The problems are that communities are not stepping up and helping every child succeed .
If you have children who are living in poverty , if you have children who are coming from families where there is disruption , whether it be addiction or a mental illness or imprisonment , those kids need more help .
I want communities to provide more support for our students and our teachers .
We should get back to the idea of community schools .
Schools are public treasures , and we should look for ways that schools can incorporate , the way they used to , health , counseling , as well as a curriculum that is much broader than what is now available .
You should not have to go to a wealthy school in a wealthy suburb to get art and music and theater and the other kinds of learning and teaching that will help kids .
I feel passionately about this because I am a product of really good public schools .
I had great teachers from kindergarten through high school . They challenged me .
They helped me understand the world I lived in and what I could do to make a difference .
And we had everything . I can't tell you , I was so fortunate music and art .
Those were just part of the curriculum . I was a terrible singer even though I loved to sing .
In fact , probably the worst moment in my terrible singing career was after singing to my daughter every night before I put her to bed ; about the age of 18 months she had learned to say a few words and I was singing away , rocking her , and she reaches up and puts her little finger on my mouth and says ,
No sing , mommy , no sing . But before my daughter told me that , our music teacher told me that .
We need to create those memories and those opportunities for our kids today .
And I will be absolutely committed to doing everything I can imagine to help school districts like this one , and also really poor school districts .
Within the last two weeks , I 've been in schools in South Carolina , rural South Carolina , that were literally falling apart .
And I 've been in Detroit where the schools are in such bad condition , children are in classrooms with mold and rodents .
I used to have a test . I called it the Chelsea test , after my daughter .
I would go to public schools in Arkansas , or when my husband started running for president all across the country , and I would say to myself : would I send my daughter there ?
A lot of places the answer was yes , and proud to do it .
Too many times the answer was no . There should not be a single public school in our country where any person wouldn't want to send their child .
And that is the way we should think about it .
And if you are in a position of public responsibility , look in the mirror and ask yourself : would you send your child or your grandchild to these schools ?
And if the answer is no , do something about it improve conditions in the facilities and the curriculum .
Now , there is a lot at stake in this election .
The stakes keep getting higher and the rhetoric on the Republican side keeps getting lower .
That 's why it 's really important , as the congressman said , that you vote early or you vote on Tuesday .
I would be honored to earn your support because I believe North Carolina needs a president who will work with those who are interested in creating the future that North Carolina should have for all of your citizens .
So I know it 's really hot , and for some of us being this hot is like a sauna and you feel like maybe you 're going to lose a pound or two .
But for others , it may be a little too hot .
So let me just end with this . There 's a lot I want to do .
I want to stand up for voting rights against the kind of restriction that North Carolina is imposing .
It is outrageous that in 2016 , we have to say we 're for voting rights .
I thought that was settled decades ago . But one of the ways to make sure that we stop this is to do everything you can to turn out as many people as possible , to demonstrate we are not going to be intimidated by these restrictive rules that are being imposed unfairly , and I would argue unconstitutionally .
And yes , I will take on the gun lobby .
33,000 people a year die from gun violence . There are ways we can do this .
Everything I 've proposed comprehensive background checks and the like are supported by 92 percent of the American people and 85 percent of gun owners .
Folks talk all the time about the powerful interests in Washington , and they list them off : Wall Street and drug companies and insurance companies and big oil .
Absolutely , they all have too much say . But you know what the strongest lobby is ?
It 's the gun lobby , which intimidates people , threatens elected officials .
It is time , my friends , we stand together and say enough , we 're going to save lives , we 're going to protect our communities and our families .
I stand with the families of Sandy Hook . Think of how you would feel .
You send off your precious first-grader , maybe with a little backpack on his or her back , and the next think you hear is that some crazed person has taken an AR-15 and murdered those precious children and some of their teachers .
The families of Sandy Hook are suing the maker of the AR-15 .
And they are trying to prevent other families from ever experiencing what they have gone through .
But here 's the problem . A law was passed a few years ago immunizing the gun companies and sellers from liability .
I voted against it ; my opponent voted for it .
There is not another industry in America that has that kind of free pass no accountability .
Cars kill people ; they can be sued . Drugs , prescription drugs do .
Toys even do . Families can hold somebody accountable and try to change practices .
Under this law , suits like this one have been thrown out .
I hope that the parents of Sandy Hook have better luck , but I will tell you this : I will do everything I can to make sure gun makers and sellers are accountable , just like any other business in our country .
So my friends , I am thrilled to be back in this beautiful state .
I can't believe the way spring has already come . Of course that does remind us we do have to take climate change seriously , which I intend to do .
But the weather should be beautiful , so don't waste any time .
Vote before early voting closes . Vote on March 15 .
If you will go and vote for me on Tuesday , I will work and fight for you as hard as I can .
Thank you all very much . Thank you so much .
It is wonderful to be here and see so many friends .
I 've spoken at a lot of AIPAC conferences in the past , but this has to be one of the biggest yet .
And there are so many young people here thousands of college students from hundreds of campuses across the country .
I think we should all give them a hand for being here and beginning their commitment to this important cause !
You will keep the U . S . -Israel relationship going strong .
As a senator from New York and secretary of state , I 've had the privilege of working closely with AIPAC members to strengthen and deepen America 's ties with Israel .
Now we may not have always agreed on every detail , but we 've always shared an unwavering , unshakeable commitment to our alliance and to Israel 's future as a secure and democratic homeland for the Jewish people .
And your support helped us expand security and intelligence cooperation , develop the Iron Dome missile defense system , build a global coalition to impose the toughest sanctions in history on Iran , and much more .
Since my first visit to Israel nearly 30 years ago , I have returned many times and made many friends .
I 've worked with and learned from some of Israel 's great leaders although I don't think Yitzhak Rabin ever forgave me for banishing him to the White House balcony when he wanted to smoke .
Now I 'm here as a candidate for president and I know that all of you understand what 's at stake in this election .
Our next president will walk into the Oval Office next January and immediately face a world of both perils we must meet with strength and skill , and opportunities we must seize and build on .
The next President will sit down at that desk and start making decisions that will affect both the lives and livelihoods of every American , and the security of our friends around the world .
So we have to get this right . As AIPAC members , you understand that while the turmoil of the Middle East presents enormous challenge and complexity , walking away is not an option .
Candidates for president who think the United States can outsource Middle East security to dictators or that America no longer has vital national interests at stake in the region are dangerously wrong .
It would be a serious mistake for the United States to abandon our responsibilities or cede the mantle of leadership for global peace and security to anyone else .
As we gather here , three evolving Iran 's continued aggression , a rising tide of extremism across a wide arc of instability , and the growing effort to delegitimize Israel on the world stage are converging to make the U . S . -Israel alliance more indispensable than ever .
We have to combat all these trends with even more intense security and diplomatic cooperation .
The United States and Israel must be closer than ever , stronger than ever and more determined than ever to prevail against our shared adversaries and advance our shared values .
This is especially true at a time when Israel faces brutal terrorist stabbings , shootings , and vehicle attacks at home .
Parents worry about letting their children walk down the street .
Families live in fear . Just a few weeks ago , a young American veteran and West Point graduate named Taylor Force was murdered by a Palestinian terrorist near the Jaffa port .
These attacks must end immediately and Palestinian leaders need to stop inciting violence , stop celebrating terrorists as martyrs and stop paying rewards to their families !
Because we understand the threats Israel faces . We know we can never take for granted the strength of our alliance or the success of our efforts .
Today , Americans and Israelis face momentous choices that will help determine the future of our relationship and of both our nations .
The first choice is this : Are we prepared to take the U . S . -Israel alliance to the next level ?
This relationship has always been stronger and deeper than the headlines might lead you to believe .
Our work together to develop the Iron Dome saved many Israeli lives when Hamas rockets began to fly .
I saw its effectiveness first-hand in 2012 when I worked with Prime Minister Netanyahu to negotiate a ceasefire in Gaza .
And if I 'm fortunate enough to be elected President , the United States will reaffirm we have a strong and enduring national interest in Israel 's security .
And we will never allow Israel 's adversaries to think a wedge can be driven between us .
When we have differences , as any friends do , we will work to resolve them quickly and respectfully .
We will also be clear that the United States has an enduring interest in and commitment to a more peaceful , more stable , more secure Middle East .
And we will step up our efforts to achieve that outcome .
Indeed , at a time of unprecedented chaos and conflict in the region , America America needs an Israel strong enough to deter and defend against its enemies , strong enough to work with us to tackle shared challenges and strong enough to take bold steps in the pursuit of peace .
That 's why I believe we must take our alliance to the next level .
I hope a new 10-year defense memorandum of understanding is concluded as soon as possible to meet Israel 's security needs far into the future
That will also send a clear message to Israel 's enemies that the United States and Israel stand together , united
It 's also why , as President , I will make a firm commitment to ensure Israel maintains its qualitative military edge .
The United States should provide Israel with the most sophisticated defense technology so it can deter and stop any threat .
That includes bolstering Israeli missile defenses with new systems like the Arrow 3 and David 's Sling .
And we should work together to develop better tunnel detection technology to prevent arms smuggling , kidnapping , and terrorist attacks .
One of the first things I 'll do in office is invite the Israeli Prime Minster to visit the White House
And I will send a delegation from the Pentagon and the Joint Chiefs to Israel for early consultations .
Let 's also expand our collaboration beyond security . Together we can build an even more vibrant culture of innovation that tightens the links between Silicon Valley and Israeli tech companies and entrepreneurs .
There is much Americans can learn from Israel , from cyber security to energy security to water security and just on an everyday people-to-people level .
And it 's especially important to continue fostering relationships between American and Israeli young people who may not always remember our shared past .
They are the future of our relationship and we have to do more to promote that .
Many of the young people here today are on the front lines of the battle to oppose the alarming Boycott , Divestment , and Sanctions movement , or BDS .
Particularly at a time when anti-Semitism is on the rise across the world especially in Europe we must repudiate all efforts to malign , isolate , and undermine Israel and the Jewish people .
I 've been sounding the alarm for a while now .
As I wrote last year in a letter to the heads of major Jewish American organizations , we have to be united in fighting back against BDS . Many of its proponents have demonized Israeli scientists and intellectuals , even students .
To all the college students who may have encountered this on campus , I hope you stay strong .
Keep speaking out . Don't let anyone silence you , bully you , or try to shut down debate , especially in places of learning like colleges and universities .
Anti-Semitism has no place in any civilized society , not in America , not in Europe , not anywhere .
All of this work defending Israel 's legitimacy on the world stage , expanding security and economic ties , taking our alliance to the next level
depends on electing a President with a deep , personal commitment to Israel 's future as a secure , democratic , Jewish state and to America 's responsibilities as a global leader .
Tonight , you 'll hear from candidates with very different visions of American leadership in the region and around the world .
You 'll get a glimpse of a potential U.S. foreign policy that would insult our allies , not engage them , and embolden our adversaries , not defeat them .
For the security of Israel and the world , we need America to remain a respected global leader committed to defending and advancing the international order an America able to block efforts to isolate or attack Israel .
The alternative is unthinkable . Yes , we need steady hands , not a President who says he 's neutral on Monday , pro-Israel on Tuesday , and who-knows-what on Wednesday because everything 's negotiable .
Well my friends , Israel 's security is non-negotiable . I 've sat in Israeli hospital rooms , holding the hands of men and women whose bodies and lives were torn apart by terrorist bombs .
I 've listened to doctors describe the shrapnel left in a leg , an arm , or even a head .
That 's why I feel so strongly that America can't ever be neutral when it comes to Israel 's security or survival .
We can't be neutral when rockets rain down on residential neighborhoods , when civilians are stabbed in the street , when suicide bombers target the innocent .
Some things aren't negotiable and anyone who doesn't understand that has no business being our president .
The second choice we face is whether we will have the strength and commitment to confront the adversaries that threaten us especially Iran .
For many years , we 've all been rightly focused on the existential danger of Iran acquiring a nuclear weapon .
After all , this remains an extremist regime that threatens to annihilate Israel .
That 's why I led the diplomacy to impose crippling sanctions and force Iran to the negotiating table , and why I ultimately supported the agreement that has put a lid on its nuclear program .
Today , Iran 's enriched uranium is all but gone , thousands of centrifuges have stopped spinning , Iran 's potential break-out time has increased , and new verification measures are in place to help us deter and detect any cheating .
The United States , Israel , and the world are safer as a result .
But still , as I laid out in a speech at the Brookings Institution last year , it 's not good enough to trust and verify .
Our approach must be distrust and verify . This deal must come with vigorous enforcement , strong monitoring , clear consequences for any violations , and a broader strategy to confront Iran 's aggression across the region .
We cannot forget that Tehran 's fingerprints are on nearly every conflict across the Middle East , from Syria to Lebanon to Yemen .
The Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps and its proxies are attempting to establish a position on the Golan from which to threaten Israel , and they continue to fund Palestinian terrorists .
In Lebanon , Hezbollah is amassing an arsenal of increasingly sophisticated rockets and artillery that well may be able to hit every city in Israel .
Tonight you will hear a lot of over-heated rhetoric from the other candidates about Iran , but there 's a big difference between talking about holding Tehran accountable and actually doing it .
Our next President has to be able to hold together our global coalition and impose real consequences for even the smallest violations of this agreement .
We must maintain the legal and diplomatic architecture to turn all the sanctions back on if needed .
If I 'm elected , the leaders of Iran will have no doubt that if we see any indication that they are violating their commitments not to seek , develop , or acquire nuclear weapons , the United States will act to stop it and that we will do so with force , if necessary .
Iranian provocations like the recent ballistic missile tests also are unacceptable and should be answered firmly and quickly , including with more sanctions .
Those missiles were stamped with words declaring that , quote , Israel should be wiped from the pages of history .
We know they could reach Israel or hit the tens of thousands of American troops stationed in the Middle East .
This is a serious danger and it demands a serious response .
The United States must also continue to enforce existing sanctions and impose additional sanctions as needed on Iran and the Revolutionary Guard for their sponsorship of terrorism , illegal arms transfers , human rights violations , and other illicit behaviors like cyber attacks .
We should continue to demand the safe return of Robert Levinson and all American citizens unjustly held in Iranian prisons .
And we should work closely with Israel and other partners to cut off the flow of money and arms from Iran to Hezbollah .
If the Arab League can designate all of Hezbollah as a terrorist organization , surely it 's time for our friends in Europe and the rest of the international community to do so as well and to do that now .
At the same time , America should always stand with those voices inside Iran calling for more openness .
We know the Supreme Leader still calls the shots and that the hard-liners are intent on keeping their grip on power .
But the Iranian people themselves deserve a better future and they are trying to make their voices heard .
They should know that America is not their enemy . They should know we will support their efforts to bring positive change to Iran .
Of course Iran is not the only threat we and Israel face .
The United States and Israel also have to stand together against the threat from ISIS and other radical jihadists .
An ISIS affiliate in the Sinai is reportedly stepping up attempts to make inroads in Gaza and partner with Hamas .
On Saturday , a number of Israelis and other foreigners were injured or killed in a bombing in Istanbul that may well be linked to ISIS .
Two of the dead are U . S . -Israeli dual nationals .
This is a threat that knows no borders . That 's why I 've laid out a plan to take the fight to ISIS from the air , on the ground with local forces , and online , where they recruit and inspire .
Our goal cannot be to contain ISIS we must defeat ISIS .
Here is a third choice : Will we keep working toward a negotiated peace or lose forever the goal of two states for two peoples ?
Despite many setbacks , I remain convinced that peace with security is possible and that it is the only way to guarantee Israel 's long-term survival as a strong Jewish and democratic state .
It may be hard to imagine progress in this current climate , when many Israelis doubt that a willing and capable partner for peace even exists .
But inaction cannot an option . Israelis deserve a secure homeland for the Jewish people .
Palestinians should be able to govern themselves in their own state , in peace and dignity .
Only a negotiated two-state agreement can provide those outcomes . If we look at the broader regional context , converging interests between Israel and key Arab states could make it possible to promote progress on the Israeli-Palestinian issue .
Israelis and Palestinians could contribute to greater cooperation between Israel and Arabs .
I know how hard all of this is . I remember what it took just to convene Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas for the three sessions of direct face-to-face peace talks in 2010 that I presided over .
But Israelis and Palestinians cannot give up on the hope of peace .
That will only make it harder later . All of us need to look for opportunities to create the conditions for progress , including by taking positive actions that can rebuild trust like the recent constructive meetings between the Israeli and Palestinian Finance Ministers aiming to help bolster the Palestinian economy , or the daily on-the-ground security cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian Authority .
But at the same time , all of us must condemn actions that set back the cause of peace .
Terrorism should never be encouraged or celebrated . And children should not be taught to hate in schools that poisons the future .
Everyone has to do their part by avoiding damaging actions , including with respect to settlements .
America has an important role to play in supporting peace efforts , and as President I would continue the pursuit of peace of direct negotiations .
And let me be clear : I would vigorously oppose any attempt by outside parties to impose a solution , including by the UN Security Council .
There is one more choice that we face together , and in some ways , it may be the most important of all : Will we , as Americans and as Israelis , stay true to the shared democratic values that have always been at the heart of our relationship ?
We are both nations built by immigrants and exiles seeking to live and worship in freedom nations built on principles of equality , tolerance , and pluralism .
At our best , both Israel and America are seen as a light unto the nations
because of those values . We are both nations built by immigrants and exiles seeking to live and worship in freedom
nations built on principles of equality , tolerance , and pluralism .
At our best , both Israel and America are seen as a light unto the nations
because of those values . This is the real foundation of our alliance .
And I think it 's why so many Americans feel such a deep emotional connection with Israel .
I know I do . And it 's why we can not be neutral about Israel and Israel 's future .
Because in Israel 's story we see our own . And the story of all people who struggle for freedom and self-determination .
There are so many examples . You know we look at the Pride Parade in Tel Aviv one of the biggest and most prominent in the world .
And we marvel that such a bastion of liberty exists in a region so plagued by intolerance .
We see the vigorous even raucous debate in Israeli politics and feel right at home .
And of course some of us remember a woman , Golda Meir , leading Israel 's government decades ago and wonder what 's taking us so long here in America .
But we cannot rest on what previous generations have accomplished .
Every generation has to renew our values and yes , even fight for them .
Today Americans and Israelis face currents of intolerance and extremism that threaten the moral foundations of our societies .
Now in a democracy , we 're going to have differences .
But what Americans are hearing on the campaign trail this year is something else entirely .
Encouraging violence . Playing coy with white supremacists . Calling for 12 million immigrants to be rounded up and deported .
Demanding we turn away refugees because of their religion and proposing a ban on all Muslims entering the United States .
Playing coy with white supremacists , calling for 12 million immigrants to be rounded up and deported .
Demanding we turn away refugees because of their religion and proposing a band on all Muslims entering the United States .
Now , we 've had dark chapters in our history before .
We remember the nearly 1,000 Jews about the St. Louis who were denied entry in 1939 and sent back to Europe .
But America should be better than this . And I believe it 's our responsibility as citizens to say so .
If you see bigotry oppose it . If you see violence condemn it .
If you see a bully , stand up to him .
On Wednesday evening Jews around the world will celebrate the festival of Purim .
And children will learn the story of Esther , who refused to stay silent in the face of evil .
It wasn't easy , she had a good life , and by speaking out she risked everything .
But as Mordechai reminded her , we all have the obligation to do our part when danger gathers .
And those of us with power or influence have a special responsibility to do what 's right .
As Elie Wiesel said when accepting the Nobel Peace Prize , Neutrality helps the oppressor , never the victim .
Silence encourages the tormentor , never the tormented . So my friends , let us never be neutral or silent in the face of bigotry .
Together let us defend the shared values that already make America and Israel great .
Let us do the hard work necessary to keep building our friendship and reach out to the next generation of Americans and Israelis so the bounds between our nations grow even deeper and stronger .
We are stronger together and if we face the future side-by-side , I know for both Israel and America , our best days are still ahead .
Thanks you , so much . Thank you . Thank you very much , Mike , thank you for the introduction , but more than that for your service to our country , and our partnership during the four years I served as secretary of state .
What happens in Vladivostok stays in Vladivostok . I am delighted to be back here at Stanford .
And I will never forget the day that we first brought Chelsea here .
I brought her to visit when she was thinking about schools , but I knew as soon as she saw Stanford that this is where , if she were fortunate enough to be admitted , she would certainly choose to come .
And , of course , I remember when Bill and I brought her here to begin her freshman year , and then the dinner for parents that Mike was referring to .
So it 's a great treat to be back . And now that my daughter is a mother herself you can there 's already talk , at least among one or two members of our family , since her husband is also an alum of Stanford , about how good Charlotte would look one day in Cardinal red .
I am delighted to be here with some very distinguished guests .
Secretary Shultz , Secretary Perry , thank you both for being here with us .
Lanny , thank you . Marcos , thank you , and others .
It 's really a great treat for me to be not only at the university , but at this particular institute as well .
You have really made Stanford a center for national security scholarship , and that is the principle reason why I am here today .
Yesterday 's attack in Brussels was the latest brutal reminder that our fight against ISIS and radical jihadist terrorism is far from finished .
More than 30 innocent people are dead men and women , hurrying to catch a plane , or waiting for a train , or meeting a loved one .
Hundreds more are wounded , including three Mormon missionaries from Utah ; a U.S. Air Force officer , his wife and four children ; and other Americans .
It 's understandable that Americans here at home are worried .
The threat we face from terrorism is real , it 's urgent , and it knows no boundaries .
Even as Brussels grieves , the memories of Paris and San Bernardino are painfully fresh as well .
On Saturday , a bombing in Istanbul killed four people , including two U . S . -Israeli dual citizens .
Many other places have been targeted by terrorists in the past year alone .
Hotels in West Africa . Beaches in Tunisia . A market in Lebanon .
A Russian passenger jet in the Sinai . ISIS is attempting a genocide of religious and ethnic minorities .
It beheads civilians . It enslaves , tortures , and rapes women and girls .
Walls will not protect us from this threat . We cannot contain ISIS we must defeat ISIS .
This will be one of the most important challenges facing the next president , who takes office on January 20 .
Our new commander in chief will walk into the Oval Office and find a world of hard choices and complex problems .
That president will sit down at that desk and start making decisions that will affect the lives and livelihoods of every American , and people around the world .
So , the stakes could not be higher . Today , I want to emphasize three points .
First , we face an adversary that is constantly adapting and operating across multiple theaters , so our response must be just as nimble and far-reaching .
Second , to defeat this transnational threat , we need to reinforce the alliances that have been core pillars of American power for decades .
And third , we need to rely on what actually works not bluster that alienates our partners and doesn't make us any safer .
Let 's begin by being clear about what we are facing : ISIS controls a shrinking but still sizeable territory in Iraq and Syria .
It leads a far-flung network that includes affiliates across the Middle East and North Africa , and cells in Europe , Asia , and even here in North America .
It 's also part of a broader ideological movement that includes other terrorist groups .
We need to do battle on all these fronts . Last year , in speeches in New York and Minneapolis , I laid out a three-part plan to defeat ISIS in the Middle East , around the world , and here at home .
Recent events have only reinforced the urgency of this mission .
First , we do have to take out ISIS ' stronghold in Iraq and Syria .
We should intensify the coalition air campaign against its fighters , leaders , and infrastructure ; step up support for local Arab and Kurdish forces on the ground and coalition efforts to protect civilians ; and pursue a diplomatic strategy aimed at achieving political resolutions to Syria 's civil war and Iraq 's sectarian divide .
Second , we must dismantle the global network of terror that supplies money , arms , propaganda , and fighters .
This means targeted efforts to deal with ISIS affiliates , from Libya to Afghanistan .
It means going after the key enablers who facilitate illicit financial transactions and help jihadists arrange travel , forge documents , and evade detection .
And it means waging online battles with extremists to discredit their ideology , expose their lies , and counter their appeals to potential recruits in the West and around the world .
Third , we must harden our defenses and build our resilience here at home .
We need to counter each step in the process that can lead to an attack , deterring would-be terrorists and discovering and disrupting plots before they 're carried out .
Our enemies are constantly adapting , so we have to do the same .
For example , Brussels demonstrated , clearly , we need to take a harder look at security protocols at airports and other sensitive so-called soft sites , especially areas outside guarded perimeters .
To do all this , we need an intelligence surge and so do our allies .
We also have to stay ahead of the curve technologically .
That does mean working with the brightest minds here in Silicon Valley to more effectively track and analyze ISIS 's social media posts and map jihadist networks online .
When other candidates talk about building walls around America , I want to ask them : How high does the wall have to be to keep the internet out ?
And we also have to tackle a thorny challenge that is top-of-mind here in the Bay Area : navigating the security and civil liberties concerns surrounding the encryption of mobile devices and communications .
Impenetrable encryption provides significant cybersecurity advantages , but may also make it harder for law enforcement and counterterrorism professionals to investigate plots and prevent future attacks .
ISIS knows this , too . At the same time , there are legitimate worries about privacy , network security , and creating new vulnerabilities that bad actors including terrorists can exploit .
There may be no quick or magic fix . In the Apple case , the FBI may have found a work-around but there will be future cases , with different facts and different challenges .
So the tech community and the government have to stop seeing each other as adversaries and start working together to protect our safety and our privacy .
A National Commission on Encryption , like Senator Mark Warner and Congressman Mike McCaul are proposing , could help .
And our security professionals could use the advice and talents of technology professionals to help us figure out how we do stay ahead of the terrorists .
Our fight against radical jihadist terrorists will be long , and there is very real risk of future attacks here at home .
But pursuing this comprehensive strategy will put us in the best position to defeat ISIS and keep our families and communities safe .
This is a very personal issue for me , having served as a Senator from New York on 9/11 .
Having seen the horrors that were produced by a well-planned and executed attack on our country .
Knowing how important it is that we do stay ahead of those who wish to do us great harm , without panic , without paranoia but with resolve not to give in to the very behavior the terrorists are hoping to engender .
We can't let fear stop us from doing what 's necessary to keep us safe nor can we let it push us into reckless actions that end up making us less safe .
For example , it would be a serious mistake to stumble into another costly ground war in the Middle East .
If we 've learned anything from Iraq and Afghanistan , it 's that people and nations have to secure their own communities .
We can I argue , must support them , but we can't substitute for them .
It would also be a serious mistake to begin carpet bombing populated areas into oblivion .
Proposing that doesn't make you sound tough it makes you sound like you 're in over your head .
Slogans aren't a strategy . Loose cannons tend to misfire .
What America needs is strong , smart , steady leadership to wage and win this struggle .
To do that , we need to strengthen America 's alliances in Europe , Asia , and around the world .
And that is the second point I want to emphasize .
On 9/11 , NATO treated an attack against one as an attack against all .
On September 12 , headlines across Europe , most notably in
Le Monde , proclaimed , We are all Americans .
There were very few planes in the air that day but one was a British jet carrying the UK 's top national security leaders to Washington to offer any help they could .
Now it 's our turn to stand with Europe . We cherish the same values and face the same adversaries so we must share the same determination .
This is especially true at a time when Europe faces multiple overlapping crises from President Putin 's aggression in Ukraine , to the massive influx of refugees , to continuing economic challenges , to the rise of right-wing nationalist parties .
We have made so much progress together toward the goal of a Europe that is free , whole , and at peace and we can't risk letting it fall apart now .
For decades , Republican and Democratic administrations have understood that America 's alliances make us stronger .
Secretary Shultz compared the slow , steady work of building diplomatic relationships to gardening .
He knew that when you cultivate effective partners , you can harvest real rewards .
Allies extend our reach , share intelligence , provide troops in conflicts like Afghanistan , offer bases and staging areas around the world for our military , and serve as a bulwark against competitors like Russia and China .
And , by the way , both Moscow and Beijing know our global network of alliances is a significant strategic advantage they can't match .
NATO , in particular , is one of the best investments America has ever made .
From the Balkans to Afghanistan and beyond , NATO allies have fought alongside the United States , sharing the burdens and the sacrifices .
In the 1990s , Secretary Perry helped guide NATO 's expansion based on the alliance 's core tenets of collective defense , democracy , consensus , and cooperative security .
They became known as the Perry Principles , and they 're still at the heart of what makes NATO the most successful alliance in history .
Turning our back on our alliances or turning our alliance into a protection racket would reverse decades of bipartisan American leadership and send a dangerous signal to friend and foe alike .
Putin already hopes to divide Europe . If Mr. Trump gets his way , it 'll be like Christmas in the Kremlin .
It will make America less safe and the world more dangerous .
When it comes to the struggle against ISIS , we need our allies as much as ever .
We need them to be strong and engaged , for they are increasingly on the front lines .
London , Paris , Madrid , Brussels , they 've all been hit by terrorism .
And , as we saw when a terrorist cell in Hamburg carried out the 9/11 attacks : What happens in Europe has a way of making it to America .
So it 's essential that we have strong partners who can work with us to disrupt plots and dismantle networks in their own countries before they lead to attacks in ours .
America needs European intelligence services working hand-in-hand with our own , including where they may have better reach and expertise , like in North Africa .
We need European banks to stop terrorist financing . We need European planes flying missions over Iraq and Syria , and European special forces helping train and equip local anti-ISIS forces on the ground .
We need European diplomats and development experts working to improve governance and reduce the appeal of extremism across the wide arc of instability that stretches from West Africa all the way to Asia ; together , we can do more .
And , more urgently , to support moderate voices and stand with Tunisians , Libyans , Kurds , and others in the region who are trying to do the right thing .
And as we should , of course , be closely consulting with Israel our strongest ally in the Middle East we also have to extend our consultations to Arab partners as well .
All of this will make America safer , and help defeat ISIS .
There is much we can do to support our European partners : helping them improve intelligence and law enforcement , facilitating information sharing , working more closely at every level .
There 's also more they can do to share the burden with us .
We 'd like to see more European countries investing in defense and security , following the example Germany and others have set during the Obama administration .
The most urgent task is stopping the flow of foreign fighters to and from the Middle East .
Thousands of young recruits have flocked to Syria from France , Germany , Belgium , and the United Kingdom .
Their European passports make it easier for them to cross borders and eventually return home , radicalized and battle-hardened .
We need to know the identities of every fighter who makes that trip and start revoking passports and visas .
Stemming this tide will require much better coordination among every country along the way .
Right now , many European nations don't even alert each other when they turn away a suspected jihadist at the border , or when a passport is stolen .
And Turkey , a NATO ally , still has more work to do to control the border where most foreign fighters cross into Syria .
After the Paris attack , France and Belgium pledged to move forward together on reforms but that 's difficult without the European Union .
In January , the EU announced a new , integrated counterterrorism center , but intelligence cooperation still lags , and the EU keeps delaying a vote to share traveler information between member states .
It 's actually easier for the United States to get flight manifests from EU nations than it is for EU nations to get them from their own neighbors , thanks to an agreement the U.S. negotiated when I was secretary of state .
There also has to be a special emphasis on identifying and investing in the hot spots the specific neighborhoods , prisons , and schools where recruitment happens in clusters , as we 've seen in Brussels .
And it 's time to make good on the promise of establishing a new unified European Border and Coast Guard to strengthen the continent 's external borders , which are under unprecedented pressure from refugees and migrants .
Now , this is a heartbreaking crisis . Last year , the world was horrified by the photo of a drowned toddler lying on a Turkish beach .
In the months since then , hundreds more children have died trying to reach safety .
We 've seen Europe and Syria 's neighbors in the Middle East struggle under the weight of this challenge .
It 's too big for any one country or even continent to handle alone .
I 'm glad that the EU and Turkey are now working closely together and the United States should do whatever we can to support that .
The only truly effective answer is to go to the source : End the conflict that is displacing all these people .
So we have to support and maintain the ceasefire in Syria .
And we should also work with our coalition partners and opposition forces on the ground to create safe areas where Syrians can remain in the country rather than fleeing toward Europe .
In the meantime , it would be wrong to shut our doors to orphans or to apply religious tests for people fleeing persecution .
That 's not who we are . But of course we have to be vigilant in screening and vetting everyone .
We can't allow terrorists to intimidate us into abandoning our values and humanitarian obligations but we also have to be smart and vigilant about how we process people into our country .
It would be doubly cruel if ISIS can not only force families from their homes , and but also prevent them from ever finding new ones .
And that brings me to my third point : In our fight against radical jihadism , we have to do what actually works .
One thing we know that does not work is offensive , inflammatory rhetoric that demonizes all Muslims .
There are millions of peace-loving Muslims living , working , raising families , and paying taxes in this country .
These Americans are a crucial line of defense against terrorism .
They are the most likely to recognize the warning signs of radicalization before it 's too late , and the best positioned to block it .
Last year in Minneapolis , I met parents , teachers , imams , and others in the Somali-American community who are working with law enforcement and mental health professionals to intervene with young people at risk of being radicalized .
Efforts like that deserve more local and national support . Since 9/11 , law enforcement has worked hard to build trustful and strong relationships with American Muslim communities .
As the director of the FBI told Congress : Anything that erodes that trust makes their job more difficult .
We need every American community invested in this fight , not fearful and sitting on the sidelines .
So when Republican candidates like Ted Cruz call for treating American Muslims like criminals , and for racially profiling predominantly-Muslim neighborhoods , it 's wrong .
It 's counterproductive . It 's dangerous . As a spokesman for the New York Police Department pointed out last night , that kind of blanket bigotry would treat the city 's nearly 1,000 Muslim police officers as threats .
It 's hard to imagine a more incendiary , foolish statement , he said .
Commissioner Bill Bratton of the NYPD was even more blunt this morning : He said Senator Cruz doesn't know what the hell he 's talking about .
Demonizing Muslims also alienates partners and undermines moderates we need around the world in the fight against ISIS .
There 's been a lot of talk from both Republicans and Democrats about the importance of building coalitions with Muslim nations .
Having actually done this , I can tell you : Insulting allies and partners is not a good way to start .
Another thing we know that does not work based on lots of empirical evidence is torture .
Many intelligence , military and law enforcement experts have attested to this fact .
It also puts our own troops and , increasingly , our own civilians at greater risk .
I 'm proud to have been a part of the administration that banned torture , after too many years in which we had lost our way .
And if I 'm president , the United States will not condone or practice torture anywhere in the world .
Even when we 're up against opponents who don't respect human life or human rights , torture is not the right choice .
As Senator John McCain has said : The high standard to which we hold ourselves isn't about our enemies ; it 's about us .
It 's about who we were , who we are and who we aspire to be .
America is a great nation . And this is a time for American leadership .
Smart , strong , steady leadership . No other country can rally allies and partners to defeat ISIS and win the generational struggle against radical jihadist terrorism .
Only the United States can mobilize common action on a global scale in defense of our people and our values .
America doesn't cower in fear or hide behind walls . We lead and we succeed .
Throughout our history , we have stared into the face of evil and refused to blink whether it was fascism , the Cold War , or hunting down Osama bin Laden .
And we will defeat ISIS , too . No enemy or adversary should ever underestimate the determination of the American people .
I will never forget what it was like to arrive in Brussels for the first time as secretary of state , in March of 2009 .
I was on my way to NATO . NATO headquarters was buzzing .
Hundreds of young people at the European Parliament had stood and cheered not for me , but for the idea of American leadership ; for the promise of an alliance that delivered unprecedented peace and prosperity on both sides of the Atlantic .
That 's what we need to remember today . Americans cannot and I believe will not turn on each other , turn on our allies , or turn away from our principles .
We 're in it for the long haul . And that means we 're going to work together .
And we 're going to prevail . This may be another one of the long struggles we have confronted from time to time in our history , but like all the rest of those if we can forge a bipartisan consensus , if we can bring our people to understand what this struggle means to us , if we can maintain our alliances and our partnerships , we will be successful .
And that will benefit not only our country , but the world .
And that , when you boil it down , is what American leadership has to be about .
Thank you . Hello , Madison ! Well , thank you all very much .
Thank you . Thank you and please , please be seated .
I am delighted to be back at this beautiful school , in this wonderful city and to have a chance to talk with all of you .
I want to recognize former Governor Doyle . Thank you so much for being here .
Somebody asked me , So , why are you going to Madison ?
I said , Why wouldn't I ? I love going to Madison .
I 've been to Madison quite a few times .
Well , I mean , it 's a place where your opponent is very competitive .
I said , Yeah that 's true , but I 'm here because , not only do I want to compete for every vote , I respect the people of Madison and Dane County .
I want a chance to talk with you and I want you to know where I am coming from with respect to one of the most important issues facing our country .
As someone who 's been fighting for progressive causes her whole life .
I think it 's important that we take a broad view about what 's at stake in this election .
I 've been making the case in this campaign that we 're not a single-issue country .
Our next president has to be able to break down all the barriers that are holding us back , not just some of them .
And there are so many challenges we need to take on that don't always get the attention they deserve on the campaign trail .
So today I 'm going to talk about one of those challenges something that matters a great deal to our future , to your future , the future of our country , and that is the Supreme Court .
Stop and think about it and how many law students are here ?
Do we have some ? Law students are here , so you think about this .
But if you do stop and think this , the court shapes virtually every aspect of life in the United States from whether you can marry the person you love , to whether you can get healthcare , to whether your classmates can carry guns around this campus .
A lot of Americans are concerned about money in politics , and rightly so .
It 's a serious problem that we have to address .
But Supreme Court justices are appointed for life . They 're not making decisions based on campaign contributions ; they 're making them based on legal philosophy and in some cases , ideology .
And for a long time now , the ideological bent of the court has led our country in the wrong direction , especially when it comes to stacking the deck in favor of the already wealthy and powerful .
If we 're serious about fighting for progressive causes , we need to focus on the court : who sits on it , how we choose them , and how much we let politics partisan politics dominate that process .
And I can't think of a better place for this discussion than right here in Madison , because these decisions will affect you .
Before I was a senator from New York or a secretary of state , and even before I was a wife or mother , for that matter I was a lawyer .
I was drawn to the law for the same reason a lot of young people are : I put my faith in justice and fairness .
And I saw the profound impact that our justice system has on people 's lives , for better or for worse .
And I wanted to help make it for the better .
So when I was in law school I volunteered for the New Haven legal aid association .
After I graduated , I put my legal education to work at the Children 's Defense Fund .
I ran the legal aid clinic at the University of Arkansas Law School where I taught , supervising students providing legal assistance to prison inmates and poor families .
And when President Carter appointed me to the Legal Services Corporation , which is the largest single provider of civil legal aid in America , it was one of the greatest honors of my life .
And we fought hard to convince Congress that using the law to help poor families was a just and necessary cause .
And we won that fight . We hired an army of lawyers to work on behalf of more than a million poor clients across the country helping families avoid eviction , fight discrimination , receive their earned federal benefits , and so much more .
But I also learned , when the administration changed , and President Carter went out , and President Reagan went in , that you couldn't ever rest in the fight for justice and fairness .
And we kept fighting . And thankfully we had increased legal services before that time because it 's been pretty much static ever since .
Because of these experiences , I come to the issue of the Supreme Court not just as a former senator who took my constitutional responsibility to advise and consent seriously , but also as a lawyer who spent years fighting for people who weren't getting a fair deal in our system .
And I carry all these experiences with me all those clients and all those cases every single day .
So today , I want to share some of my thoughts on the Supreme Court , and then I would love to hear from you .
We start with that basic premise that I already stated : The court matters .
At its best , the court is a place where the least powerful voices in our society are heard and protected whether they be African Americans trying to vote or people getting an education in the era of segregated schools and poll taxes , or women trying to make our own health decisions in the face of humiliating laws that would strip that right away .
Now this may be hard for you today in 2016 to really believe , but I was in high school .
The Supreme Court decided a case called Griswold v . Connecticut .
That case recognized that women have the right to make the personal choice of whether to use birth control .
Before that in some places in our country like Connecticut , it could be a criminal offense .
So that case left a powerful impression on me . Along with all the civil rights cases from the 1950s forward , I saw the court as a place where wrongs were righted , and where everyday folks could stand on equal footing with the most powerful people in the land .
In recent years , the court has made a lot of high-profile decisions some that uphold this progressive tradition , and some that tarnish it .
It effectively declared George W . Bush president . It cut the heart out of the Voting Rights Act .
It overturned commonsense laws addressing gun violence , and said that certain employers get to decide whether their female workers can access free birth control under the Affordable Care Act .
But it also made same-sex marriage legal nationwide , preserved the Affordable Care Act not once , but twice and ensured equal access to education for women .
The death of Justice Scalia marked the end of an era .
Now as you know , there 's a fight over whether President Obama should nominate a replacement , as the Constitution requires .
And that fight is revealing the worst of our politics the same obstructionism that we 've seen from Republicans since the beginning of the Obama Administration , the same disregard for the rule of the law that 's given rise to the extremist candidacies of Donald Trump and Ted Cruz .
It 's corroding our democracy , and it has to stop .
For those of you who aren't following the saga , the story is pretty straightforward : President Obama has done his job and nominated Merrick Garland , one of the most respected judges in the country , to become the ninth justice .
Democrats admire him . Republicans do , too . In fact , a few years ago , when another seat was open on the court , Senator Orrin Hatch of who 's not exactly a liberal said that if the president named Judge Garland , there was
no question that he 'd be confirmed . In fact Senator Hatch called the judge a consensus nominee .
Now normally , this is when the Senate would do its job hold hearings , consider the nomination , call for a vote .
But Republicans say they won't . They won't even hold a hearing .
It doesn't matter how qualified the president 's nominee is , or what the Constitution says , or what our country needs .
This is their job ! But they refuse to do it .
Senator Chuck Grassley , the head of the judiciary committee , could hold a hearing tomorrow if he wanted .
But he says we should wait for a new president because , and I quote , the American people shouldn't be denied a voice .
Well , as one of the more than 65 million Americans who voted to re-elect Barack Obama , I 'd say my voice is being ignored right now because of their obstructionism .
We chose a president . We chose him twice . And now Republicans in the Senate are acting like our votes didn't count , and that President Obama is not still our nation 's leader .
And I 'll tell you , those are not high-minded principles they are low-minded politics .
And today , I 'm adding my voice to the chorus asking Senator Grassley to step up and do his job .
He should hold a hearing and he should schedule it as soon as the Senate returns from recess .
But let 's keep in mind this battle is bigger than just one empty seat on the court .
By Election Day , two justices will be more than 80 years old past the court 's average retirement age .
The next president could end up nominating multiple justices . That means whoever America elects this fall will help determine the future of the court for decades to come .
Just look at the court 's docket , the cases that it 's hearing this term alone .
The court is reviewing how public sector unions collect the fees they use to do their work .
The economic security of millions of teachers , social workers and first responders is at stake .
This is something the people of Wisconsin know all too well , because your governor has repeatedly attacked and bullied public sector unions , and working families have paid the price .
I think that 's wrong , and it should stop .
The court is reviewing a Texas law imposing unnecessary , expensive requirements on doctors who perform abortions .
If that law is allowed to stand , there will only be 10 or so health centers left where women can get safe , legal abortions in the whole state of Texas , a state with about 5.4 million women of reproductive age .
So it will effectively end the legal right to choose for millions of women .
The court is also reviewing whether Texas should have to exclude non-voters when drawing its electoral map .
That would leave out , among others , legal residents , people with felony convictions and children .
The fair representation of everyone in our society including 75 million children hangs in the balance .
And on top of all that , the court is reviewing affirmative action and President Obama 's executive actions on immigration , which called for halting the deportation of DREAMers and undocumented parents of citizens and legal residents .
It 's also put a hold on the president 's clean-power plan .
Either America can limit how much carbon pollution we produce , or we can't .
And if we can't , then our ability to work with other nations to meet the threat of climate change under the Paris agreement is greatly diminished .
In short : In a single term , the Supreme Court could demolish pillars of the progressive movement .
And as someone who has worked on every single one of these issues for decades , I see this as a make-or-break moment .
If you care about the fairness of elections , the future of unions , racial disparities in universities , the rights of women , or the future of our planet , you should care about who wins the presidency and appoints the next Supreme Court justices .
And consider , if you will , the dangerous turn the court has taken in recent years toward protecting the rights of corporations over those of people .
Now you may have heard of the case Citizens United .
The court ruled that corporations have an unfettered right to free speech , just like you and me .
That means no limit on what corporations can spend independently to influence elections .
And big surprise a flood of money from rich people , corporations and special interests has poured into our politics .
Citizens United opened the door to the creation of super PACs and between the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections , spending by outside groups tripled .
In 2014 , the top 100 donors to super PACs spent nearly as much as all 4.75 million small donors in the country combined .
Now the idea , I believe , that money is speech turns our Constitution upside down .
Wealth should not be privileged in the courts in fact , it should have no privilege .
Yet at a time when inequality between working Americans and those at the top is starker than ever , the Supreme Court has given the wealthiest Americans even greater power to affect what happens in our democracy .
Justice Ginsburg says if there were one recent decision she 'd overrule , it 's this one .
I 'm with her . And I hope she gets the chance to do just that .
Now people forget this , but the Citizens United case actually began with yet another a right-wing attack on me .
It grew out of a Wisconsin case about whether corporations can run issue ads , so-called issue ads , close to an election .
So we all have a personal stake in this . If the court doesn't overturn
Citizens United , I will fight for a constitutional amendment to limit the influence of money in elections .
It is dangerous to our country and poisonous to our politics .
But it doesn't stop with Citizens United . This court has voted on the side of corporations against the interests of workers , unions , consumers and the general public in case after case .
It 's made it harder for consumers to band together to sue a corporation , even if they are collectively suffering from corporate behavior .
So 2 million Comcast subscribers in Philadelphia were told they each had to hire a lawyer if they wanted to sue for fairer prices .
One-and-a-half million women working at Walmart each had to hire a lawyer if they wanted to sue for sex discrimination .
That 's a burden that the vast majority of people cannot afford .
I know this might sound a little technical , but it points to an alarming trend .
The court used to in the 20th century anyway protect the little guy against the rich and powerful .
More and more , it 's doing the opposite protecting the rich and powerful against the little guy .
One study found that between 2009 and 2012 , the one party most likely to convince the court to hear a case , out of all the top petitioners , from every part of our society and economy , was the U.S. Chamber of Commerce .
So the court was more likely to take up cases concerning corporate interests and then to decide in favor of those corporate interests .
If I 'm fortunate enough to be president , I will appoint justices who will make sure the scales of justice are not tipped away from individuals toward corporations and special interests ; who will protect the constitutional principles of liberty and equality for all , regardless of race , gender , sexual orientation or political viewpoint ; who will protect a woman 's right to choose , rather than billionaires ' right to buy elections ; and who will see the Constitution as a blueprint for progress , not a barrier to it .
So I hope you and everyone across Wisconsin , everyone across America , keeps the court in mind when you vote .
Now , some of you may already have decided to support me , some of you may have decided differently I will keep working to earn your vote .
But even if you are decided or undecided , I will be for you .
But I ask you this : Please make sure the court factors into your decision .
Conservatives know exactly how high the stakes are . For years , they have used aggressive legal strategies to accomplish through the courts what they 've failed to accomplish through legislation .
They couldn't pass a repeal of the Affordable Care Act , so they tried to get the courts to do it .
They couldn't stop the president 's Clean Power Plan , and they couldn't pass immigration reform , and they didn't want the president to act , so they got the courts to step in .
Now they are fighting hard to make sure the Supreme Court includes as many right-wing justices as possible .
As scary as it might be , ask yourselves : What kind of justice will a President Trump appoint ?
Or for that matter , what kind of attorney general ?
What kind of lower court judges ? And as you know , he believes Muslims should be banned from entering this country because of their faith .
What would that mean for a nation founded on religious freedom ?
He wants to round up 11 million immigrants and kick them out .
What would that mean for a nation built by immigrants ?
He says wages for working people are too high and we shouldn't raise the minimum wage .
What would that mean for working people , and a court that 's already tilting in favor of powerful corporations ?
Let 's be clear about what 's really going on here .
The current fight over Judge Garland is just the latest in a long line of actions aimed at disrupting our government and undermining our president .
And the result is an America that 's more divided , more dysfunctional , and less secure .
Consider how Republicans , led by Ted Cruz , shut down the entire federal government in 2013 , rather than fund the Affordable Care Act .
Or how they almost shut down the government again last fall over trying to defund Planned Parenthood .
Remember what Mitch McConnell , the Republican leader in the Senate , said back in 2010 that the single most important priority for Republicans was making Barack Obama a one-term president .
Now some people thought that was hyperbole . But I always remember Maya Angelou 's advice :
When someone shows you who they are , believe them .
Right ? And today , Republican leaders have been showing us who they are , in fact , for a long time .
Blocking Judge Garland is just the latest evidence and we should start believing them .
If you want to know where that kind of obstruction and recklessness leads , just look at the Republican race for the presidency .
Now every day , another Republican bemoans the rise of Donald Trump .
They say a Trump nomination will set their party back decades .
I agree . It will set the Republican Party back if Donald Trump is their standard-bearer .
But Donald Trump didn't come out of nowhere . What the Republicans have sown with their extremist tactics , they are now reaping with Donald Trump 's candidacy .
It wasn't long after Senator McConnell said his number-one goal was to prevent the president 's reelection that Donald Trump started his racist campaign to discredit the president 's citizenship remember the birther movement ?
And Ted Cruz embarked on his strategy of holding the government hostage to get his way .
These things are connected . When you have leaders willing to bring the whole of government to a halt to make headlines , you may just give rise to candidates who promise to do even more radical and dangerous things because once you make the extreme normal , you open the door to even worse .
And when you have a party dead-set on demonizing the president , you may just end up with a candidate who says the president never legally was the president at all .
Enough is enough . It 's time for us to take a stand and you can start right here in Wisconsin .
Your senator , Ron Johnson , is bragging about blocking the president .
He 's in a tight race against former Senator Russ Feingold , an exceptional public servant .
During his time on the Senate Judiciary Committee , Senator Feingold actually helped build a stronger judiciary .
So when you leave here , I urge you to call the office of Senator Johnson , email him , contact him if he has a Facebook page , go on and express your opinion .
Tell him to stop playing games with the Supreme Court .
And remember this , remember this in November , when you choose who stands for you in the Senate : The incumbent will vote for corporations and against working people .
His opponent will vote for a court that will listen to you .
Then keep these larger issues in mind when you go to the polls on April 5 .
It 's time to get back to what makes America already great respect for the rule of law , statesmanship over showmanship , and people working together across party lines for the good of the nation .
That 's what this court fight is really about . That 's what this election is about whether we , as a country , are able to come together to meet the challenges we face and break down all the barriers holding people back ; or whether we will be paralyzed by deadlock and divided from each other by bitter partisanship .
At our best , America has united behind the ideal that everyone deserves a fair shot , no matter who we are or where we started out .
And at its best , the Supreme Court has defended that ideal .
Like in 1954 , when the court abolished segregation in our schools .
Or 1973 , when it ruled that women have the right to make intimate health decisions for ourselves .
Or 1977 , when the court paved the way for public sector unions .
Or 1982 , when it ruled that undocumented children had the right to go to school .
Or just last year , when the court ruled that marriage equality was the law of the land .
You know , all Jim Obergefell wanted was to marry his partner of more than 20 years , John Arthur , before John Arthur died of ALS .
They ended up flying to Maryland , because their home state of Ohio didn't recognize same-sex marriage .
John was so sick , he couldn't even leave the plane but they got married right there on the tarmac in Baltimore , then flew straight home .
And when John died three months later , Ohio listed him as single on his death certificate .
For the partner who had loved and cared for him , this was a bitter , painful blow , a rejection of the life they had built together over decades until the Supreme Court ruled that Jim and John 's marriage was legal everywhere in the United States of America .
And in that decision , Justice Kennedy wrote , The nature of injustice is that we may not always see it in our own times .
The generations that wrote and ratified the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amendment did not presume to know the extent of freedom in all its dimensions .
So they entrusted to future generations a charge protecting the right of all persons to enjoy liberty as we learn its meaning .
That decision is the latest reminder of what the court can do when it stand for equality , or against it .
When it can make America a fairer place , or roll back the progress we 've worked so hard to achieve .
It depends on what the court decides , and it depends on who 's deciding .
Which , in the end , means it depends on all of us .
So think hard about the court . For years people have tried to make the court a voting issues , and it 's not easy to do .
People are rightly concerned about their economic well-being , about the education of their children , about their health care , about their social security payment .
About all the other issues that keep people up at night around millions of kitchen tables .
But this election has ripped away the curtain and made it absolutely clear to everyone how essential the Supreme Court is to those decisions as well .
I will keep talking about it , and advocating , and calling on the Senate to do its job , and I hope there will be a great chorus of voices across our land that will do the same .
It 's our Constitution , it 's our court , and it 's our future .
